[Amit Varma]: Have you ever asked yourself the question, how do I look from the outside?
[Amit Varma]: This is actually not a great question to ask.
[Amit Varma]: It can motivate us to be better people, but it can also keep us stressed out all the time.
[Amit Varma]: One of the core reasons for human unhappiness is the anxiety of what other people think
[Amit Varma]: of us.
[Amit Varma]: Once we get past this, once we realize that no one thinks anything of us, that everyone
[Amit Varma]: is obsessed with themselves, that's when we can start being happy.
[Amit Varma]: However, geopolitics is different.
[Amit Varma]: Nations aren't people.
[Amit Varma]: If you're in charge of India's defense of foreign policy, then how other countries think
[Amit Varma]: of us has real consequences.
[Amit Varma]: A resentful Pakistan may want to bleed us with a thousand cuts.
[Amit Varma]: A strong China may want to weaken us so that we can't ever be a threat to them, knowing
[Amit Varma]: that we can't really fight back.
[Amit Varma]: In our short history as an independent nation, we have had costly conflicts with both China
[Amit Varma]: and Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And yes, all those conflicts were costly, even if we did win a war against Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: because all conflict is a negative sum game.
[Amit Varma]: Both parties lose.
[Amit Varma]: That is why the role of our armed forces is not just to win wars and secure our borders,
[Amit Varma]: but also to avoid conflict.
[Amit Varma]: Our armed forces need to be strong, even if we hope like hell that we never actually have
[Amit Varma]: to use them.
[Amit Varma]: But are our armed forces equipped for wars of the 21st century?
[Amit Varma]: In a nuclear world, what is the relevance of conventional force?
[Amit Varma]: What role can the military play in securing our place in the world?
[Amit Varma]: Are we up for that challenge?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Sushant Singh, one of the finest defense and foreign policy analysts
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: Sushant paid his dues in the trenches by serving in the army for 20 years, which included a
[Amit Varma]: stint in Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: He then went on to become a journalist, serving as a senior editor at the Indian Express and
[Amit Varma]: winning multiple awards.
[Amit Varma]: He has taught at Yale and is now a senior fellow at the Center for Policy Research in
[Amit Varma]: New Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: I've been meaning to pick Sushant's brain for a long time, and we finally made it happen.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, we discussed his time in the army, the Kashmir issue, the India-Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: conflict, the India-China conflict, the politicization of our armed forces, as well as the state
[Amit Varma]: of our military.
[Amit Varma]: I've done episodes on some of these subjects before with the likes of Srinath Raghavan
[Amit Varma]: and General Prakash Menon, so do go over to the show notes for those links.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to this conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercised my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons, and now it is time to revive it,
[Amit Varma]: only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast, and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Sushant, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: It's a pleasure being on your show.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get started talking about all the areas in which you have expertise, our
[Amit Varma]: defence, our foreign policy, geopolitics, so on and so forth, I'm curious to know a
[Amit Varma]: little bit more about you, because, you know, you've had what seems to me to be a really
[Amit Varma]: rich life, spent 20 years in the army, been a senior editor at the Indian Express, a much
[Amit Varma]: respected analyst, you write for foreign policy as well.
[Amit Varma]: But take me to before all this, take me to your childhood, where were you born?
[Amit Varma]: What was your childhood like?
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So Amit, I was actually, I belong to the state of Uttar Pradesh and my early schooling took
[Guest]: place in the city of Agra, the erstwhile capital of India, till the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan
[Guest]: moved it.
[Guest]: Most people know it for the Taj Mahal.
[Guest]: And after my graduation, I joined the Indian Military Academy and got commissioned in the
[Guest]: Corps of Engineers in the Indian Army.
[Guest]: I was a Madras sapper.
[Guest]: Served for 20 years in the army, which included multiple stints in the erstwhile state of
[Guest]: Jammu and Kashmir, including Srinagar, you know, Rajouri, Poonchheria on the line of
[Guest]: control, Kargil Drass sector, much later after the war, and did also did a stint as a United
[Guest]: Nations military observer in Cote d'Ivoire, in Ivory Coast, in West Africa.
[Guest]: And there were other postings all over the country, which is usual for an army officer.
[Guest]: The most notable among them would be probably my stint on the India-Pakistan border during
[Guest]: Operation Parakram, which is the mobilization of the Indian Armed Forces after the terror
[Guest]: attack on Parliament in 2001, where Indian Army almost seemed prepared to go across.
[Guest]: And a lot of activity took place at that point in time.
[Guest]: After serving for 20 years in the army, I took premature retirement, voluntary retirement
[Guest]: from the army.
[Guest]: I held a corporate role for a short period of time, about a year or so, before joining
[Guest]: the Indian Express, where I was eventually the deputy editor, where I served for six
[Guest]: years, and then moved on as the as a senior fellow at Center for Policy Research with
[Guest]: the Army in Delhi, besides doing some other things, as you said, still pursuing my writings
[Guest]: and whether it is in foreign affairs or foreign policy, or in other think tanks or other places.
[Guest]: That in a nutshell, is what my life has been so far about.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that's a fabulous nutshell to compress all of that into three minutes is something
[Amit Varma]: that is not permissible, and we'll unpack different parts of it as we converse.
[Amit Varma]: But take me back to before this, take me back to your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: What kind of a kid were you?
[Amit Varma]: What was it like growing up in Agra?
[Amit Varma]: Why did you want to join the army?
[Amit Varma]: What were the other things that you wanted to do?
[Amit Varma]: What were your influences?
[Amit Varma]: And also give me a sense of your pre-army life in terms of what was your day like?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of books did you read?
[Guest]: What kind of music did you like?
[Guest]: So you know, this is of course, I'm talking about the pre-liberalization India, pre-1991
[Guest]: India, pre-Babri demolition India.
[Guest]: It was a very different India, Agra was, it was a different world, pre-internet world.
[Guest]: We all, you know, I'm sure Amit, you remember those periods, that period as well.
[Guest]: We all went to school on time, woke up on time, went to school, slept early, woke up
[Guest]: early.
[Guest]: I grew up reading a lot of Hindi magazines, a lot of newspapers, of course, were a big
[Guest]: thing at that time, you know, essentially the Hardy Boys and all the other things.
[Guest]: And because I happened to go to an English medium school, an ICSE school, I happened
[Guest]: to read all the books in the syllabus, which were there starting from whether it is the
[Guest]: Black Beauty, to the Treasure Island, to everything that a convent educated young boy read in
[Guest]: the 1980s, going up to a lot of the flies in the 12th standard, the full play of Macbeth
[Guest]: and Merchant of Venice and you know, 16 tales from Shakespeare, what have you, everything
[Guest]: the works.
[Guest]: So essentially that is what reading was about.
[Guest]: Music was primarily a lot of Hindi film music.
[Guest]: My mother was a Hindi music and Hindi film lover.
[Guest]: So we heard a lot of Hindi film music.
[Guest]: The English pop music came much later when I was much older in school and that was almost
[Guest]: at that time cassettes mainly and that was what Michael Jackson and, you know, Nothing
[Guest]: Gonna Change My Love For You and all the other things which we now cringe at, which would
[Guest]: probably make Twitter go retro and that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that was what it was like.
[Guest]: But Agra was a different city at that point in time and I have reflected it often.
[Guest]: My parents still stay in Agra and I have reflected about it often that, you know, you could actually
[Guest]: go and see an English movies would get released there.
[Guest]: And I'm not talking just about 007 movies or Steven Spielberg movies, I'm talking even
[Guest]: about movies like the Airport 77, The Lost Horizon and very early school years, primary
[Guest]: school years.
[Guest]: I actually did go and see those kind of movies in the early 80s, including The Jungle Book.
[Guest]: And I don't know if you remember, Amit, along with The Jungle Book, the India-Pakistan cricket
[Guest]: series, there was an hour long film on India-Pakistan cricket series, which was shown along with
[Guest]: The Jungle Book at that point in time, which I remember seeing at that point in time.
[Guest]: So yeah, it was a nice life.
[Guest]: It was a very different life.
[Guest]: It was easy paced life.
[Guest]: You went and played some sport, you studied hard, you know, usual middle class kid.
[Guest]: My father was a doctor.
[Guest]: You wanted to do well in life, the works, you know, standard things.
[Guest]: The army thing came up primarily because, you know, you always are looking for a good
[Guest]: job and I'll be honest about it.
[Guest]: And also it was a very exciting career.
[Guest]: As a young kid, everybody loves the uniform, the razmataz and the glamour, which is associated
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: You know, you always believe that you're going to be fighting 24 by 7 and it's all going
[Guest]: to be all action and glamour, which is, of course, not true as one learns a hard way
[Guest]: in life.
[Guest]: And so essentially that is how I ended up in the army as a very young man.
[Guest]: I got commissioned at the age of 21 and a half.
[Guest]: And yeah, and that's how the career started.
[Amit Varma]: So I always kind of find this part of the conversation fascinating, especially when
[Amit Varma]: I'm talking to someone my own age, because it kind of makes me nostalgic because I think
[Amit Varma]: young people today who have the whole world at their fingertips don't realize what kind
[Amit Varma]: of a circumscribed world we lived in.
[Amit Varma]: Like all the books you named and everything, they were part of a very small set of books
[Amit Varma]: you're reading.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a kid, you're reading Annette Blyton, Hardy Boys, Nancy Drew, then you go on to
[Amit Varma]: all these standard classics that you named.
[Amit Varma]: Even the kind of music you listened to in college was like extremely standard, whatever
[Amit Varma]: you actually got cassettes of.
[Amit Varma]: So all of that is sort of interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And even in terms of careers, you know, we had so few choices open to us, humein kuch
[Amit Varma]: pata hi nahi tha.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, you had your typical doctor and engineering and army, of course, is another
[Amit Varma]: kind of option, almost seems like a separate world and people would want to do the civil
[Amit Varma]: services, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm interested in another sort of aspect of what you kind of mentioned, which is that
[Amit Varma]: you would read a lot of Hindi magazines and newspapers.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting sort of threads that I have, you know, explored in past episodes
[Amit Varma]: with people like Akshay Mukul and Rahul Verma, who you know, and, you know, Ghazala Wahab
[Amit Varma]: who also grew up in Agra, is, you know, whether the fact that they were reading in these languages,
[Amit Varma]: reading Hindi, reading something different from what the sort of the English speaking
[Amit Varma]: world was giving you, whether that kind of made a difference in your outlook, you know,
[Amit Varma]: later on in life, and I would imagine not so much with regard to your peers in the army,
[Amit Varma]: but many, many years down the line with maybe your peers in the media, where I'd expect
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, many of the people who write about foreign policy and defence and all that
[Amit Varma]: would be typical Latins Delhi journalists who've grown up reading and speaking and thinking
[Amit Varma]: in English.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that aspect of you that were you also then equally shaped
[Amit Varma]: by what you read in the languages, while people like me were perhaps kind of stinted, although
[Amit Varma]: I did study Hindi and all that in school, but were kind of stinted because we had access
[Amit Varma]: only to one very English kind of exposure.
[Guest]: Yeah, Amit, you know, I think that is to an extent true.
[Guest]: All of us are influenced by what we read.
[Guest]: If somebody probably read Tamil literature, Tamil magazines, they would probably be influenced
[Guest]: by that.
[Guest]: So if a magazine like Dharmiyog, which was regular at my regular place, or Hindi newspapers,
[Guest]: Jan Satta, when Prabhash Joshi was editing it, or other magazines, Hindi magazines, Hindi
[Guest]: articles, Hindi journals, Hindi books, whether it is Jai Shankar Prasad that you are reading
[Guest]: or whether it is Dharmbir Bharti's Andhayog that you are reading at that young age, you
[Guest]: know, you may not make full sense of a lot of stuff and a certain sensibility and I would
[Guest]: say at that time a very socialist sensibility, which pervaded Uttar Pradesh at that point
[Guest]: in time, UP, would definitely get through and shaped you in many ways.
[Guest]: It was a period of great flux and great churning, the 1980s in India, I think it's the most
[Guest]: turbulent decade in so many ways in India's history and to be seeing it from two different
[Guest]: worlds, the English world, the times of India, the Giral Jains of the world and the Prabhash
[Guest]: Joshi's and Dharmbir Bharti's of the world, I think the ability to see through two separate
[Guest]: prisons, the same incidents, the same issues without getting polarized, without getting
[Guest]: into kind of the haranguing debate that we see nowadays, I think that does help shape
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: It allows you to look at certain possibilities, which others may not be open to, others may
[Guest]: explore much later in life.
[Guest]: More than that, a lot of it is late stage reflection, where we believe we read something
[Guest]: but we realize that we read it much later and then we transpose it to our young age
[Guest]: and thought that we had read it at that point in time.
[Guest]: So that's equally true.
[Guest]: I reread Andhayog or Rashmi Rathee and then I realized that I didn't get a bit of it when
[Guest]: I was much younger or even Premchand, reading Premchand at an early age, when you are 17,
[Guest]: 18, 16, you know, you really don't get what Premchand is trying to say till the time you
[Guest]: understand the socio-political context in which Premchand is writing it, which comes
[Guest]: much later in life.
[Guest]: At that time, you are reading it more like a linear story, more like events happening
[Guest]: one after the other, more like a good novel in that sense, without realizing where it
[Guest]: is situated, where it is located and what effect it does have, which I think, so the
[Guest]: idea that you can go back to those books again and again or maybe you could draw upon some
[Guest]: of those experiences does help in some way.
[Guest]: But Amit, let me say one more thing and I'm saying this with, as somebody who's a Hindi
[Guest]: wala so to speak, even if I did not study in a Hindi language school, there's a slight
[Guest]: amount of arrogance that has now come into a lot of people who actually studied in Hindi
[Guest]: or who actually were growing up in Hindi speaking households, saying that they are the only
[Guest]: ones who understand the real India and I think that arrogance is something which is not correct.
[Guest]: It is not healthy and people should not believe that they hold a copyright over what people
[Guest]: would call Lutyens Delhi or people who come from different sensibilities over understanding
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: India is too vast and too complex a country, too diverse a country for any one of us to
[Guest]: claim that we understand that country or even that district.
[Guest]: Districts in India are really big and states are really big.
[Guest]: We would not know and especially because India has changed so quickly and so fast, it is
[Guest]: very hard for any one of us to claim that we understand India because I grew up in XYZ
[Guest]: place or I read magazines and newspapers in XYZ language.
[Guest]: I think that's not fair on the rest of us and it shows us a kind of condescending attitude
[Guest]: which at times I find very repulsive.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's fascinating and there's a lot to think about in what you just said and one
[Amit Varma]: of the points that really struck me is that meta point you made about in hindsight reflecting
[Amit Varma]: and giving greater significance to something that happened in the past and we might now
[Amit Varma]: like.
[Amit Varma]: I often think that when we remember our past, when we kind of reconstruct our youth, are
[Amit Varma]: we also kind of making it up as we go along?
[Amit Varma]: I did a fascinating episode with Anshul Malhotra where we discuss kind of the nature of memory
[Amit Varma]: and how the brain actually works is first we remember something but the next time we
[Amit Varma]: remember it, we are not actually remembering the original event, we are remembering the
[Amit Varma]: remembering of it and so on down the line.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost as if there is a game of Chinese whispers in our head and this was like a complete
[Amit Varma]: TIL for me when I first kind of came across which is why memory can be so unreliable.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also sort of struck by what you said about the arrogance of people who are sort of this
[Amit Varma]: almost this inverse of the snobbishness of language while earlier the people who would
[Amit Varma]: study English would laud upon you and now the people who studied Hindi are saying that
[Amit Varma]: no only we know the real India and it actually seems to me that people who have had a multilingual
[Amit Varma]: a genuinely multilingual upbringing not just speaking different languages but also reading
[Amit Varma]: in them and reading different papers would have different lenses with which to examine
[Amit Varma]: the same world and at some level I think there is a deepening there which is valuable.
[Amit Varma]: Each lens can also distort what you see so I wouldn't place a value judgment on it I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure that there are these kind of trade-offs but since we are speaking about that period
[Amit Varma]: let me just kind of think aloud and take a brief digression into a something wider which
[Amit Varma]: is that when we look around at our discourse today like we know that the discourse around
[Amit Varma]: us is deeply polarized and that there is this move perhaps exacerbated by social media where
[Amit Varma]: everything is being pushed towards the extremes almost the opposite of the median voter theorem
[Amit Varma]: in a sense where our politics is being pushed to these extremes and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So couple of questions one is it the case that society is also as polarized as the polarization
[Amit Varma]: in our discourse would indicate that are we much more divided than we used to be and also
[Amit Varma]: my sense of Indian culture has been something that while there are these kind of strands
[Amit Varma]: in it that one may not appreciate it is also very assimilative, very rich, very diverse
[Amit Varma]: that cliche of a khichdi with everything in it is so accurate.
[Amit Varma]: So now when you look back on say the Agra in which you grew up the people around you
[Amit Varma]: in those times the things that you read in the Hindi newspapers and or even the English
[Amit Varma]: ones what is your sense have we really changed that much as a society or does the media today
[Amit Varma]: and the discourse today only amplify a division that always existed.
[Guest]: So Amit I would say that from the Agra that I grew up in to the Agra that exists now including
[Guest]: some of the my closest friends in school with whom I studied and who are either now businessmen
[Guest]: doctors professionals whatever they may be and probably not at my age I do find a shift
[Guest]: from the kind of values that we grew up in which we all identified with at a certain
[Guest]: point in time.
[Guest]: Is that shift as horrible as sharply divided as social media may like us to believe may
[Guest]: or may not be true but there has been definitely a shift which has taken place that it would
[Guest]: be unfair or incorrect for us to say that no shift has taken place whether the shift
[Guest]: is like where no I can't talk to someone who supports a political ideology.
[Guest]: I do not find conducive or healthy that's not true people my friends still talk to me
[Guest]: you know the old boys association still meets in that sense but are they still the same
[Guest]: people who would at that point in time feel very repulsed by what the Bajrang Dal was
[Guest]: doing or what was going on Islamophobia that was developing in the early 90s clearly not.
[Guest]: So there has been a shift there has been a change but has the change been to the extent
[Guest]: to where it's a clear split a very clear divide where nothing moves between the two sides
[Guest]: I don't think that's that's true but Agra may be a particularly different case because
[Guest]: Agra has always been as you know Amit a very major BJP stronghold the whole Braj region
[Guest]: RSS has had very strong roots owing to Mr. Vajpayee and two other leaders it saw major
[Guest]: riots after the demolition of Babri mosque in 1992 so it has a history it has a past
[Guest]: so I know to sit on a value judgment or to or to give an answer based only on Agra and
[Guest]: particularly my section of society whom I knew in Agra which is predominantly you know
[Guest]: upper caste affluent well-to-do people would not be fair but off the cuff if you put a
[Guest]: gun to my head I would say yes things have deteriorated but are they really split wide
[Amit Varma]: open which cannot be bridged may not be true you are showing your army roots by using the
[Amit Varma]: expression if I put a gun to your head listen we civilians don't do that kind of thing so
[Guest]: okay you can maybe you know whatever you put a chemical weapon or something down my throat
[Amit Varma]: or whatever yeah thereby indicating that civilians also contain much evil and I kind of wonder
[Amit Varma]: just to sort of take the same point forward that it's almost a cliche on my show to say
[Amit Varma]: that that people contain multitudes and this is something however that I've been thinking
[Amit Varma]: pretty seriously about recently because the truth is that all of your friends who would
[Amit Varma]: once have been repulsed by the Bajrang Dal but today may support that party and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth they are not simplistic people it's not like they shifted from one point
[Amit Varma]: to another point there are many conflicting impulses within them and all that has happened
[Amit Varma]: is that perhaps one particular impulse one particular narrative strand has drawn them
[Amit Varma]: out a little bit more in that direction but many of their other impulses would remain
[Amit Varma]: including assimilative impulses and they'll enjoy Urdu ghazals and all of that I'm quite
[Amit Varma]: sure so my question is that what has happened in the past 20 or 30 years is that a particular
[Amit Varma]: strand of thinking about the world about thinking almost in tribal terms othering a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of people thinking about one's culture and history in a particular way there was
[Amit Varma]: always a narrative within our society as Akshay Mukul's excellent book on the Gita Press shows
[Amit Varma]: but it has gained dominance and it strikes me that if it has gained dominance today there
[Amit Varma]: is something about it that has been attractive to the people who have become attracted to
[Amit Varma]: it like perhaps some of your friends who have gradually changed in that way what do you
[Amit Varma]: think that is and do you think that there are countervailing narratives that could also
[Amit Varma]: appeal to in a sense a better angels or the different angels of their nature if we are
[Amit Varma]: not to put a value judgment on this particular narrative very tough to say what really triggered
[Guest]: those changes as you rightly said those changes have taken place over a gradually over a period
[Guest]: of time till the time we see this dominant ideology at play Obama has a great line in
[Guest]: his new book in the memoirs the first part you know that some leaders come and I'm paraphrasing
[Guest]: it you know it's not the exact thing that some leaders come they touch upon the dark
[Guest]: side of the of the people and the dark side comes other leaders come and they touch upon
[Guest]: the good side and he's actually referring to Trump in that sense you know that all the
[Guest]: venom all the poison that you see comes out suddenly and all the anger comes out and as
[Guest]: you rightly said maybe the narrative which had gained dominance the certain kind of insecurity
[Guest]: so there are multiple factors at play there's global factor of 9-11 as you probably somebody
[Guest]: on your show I'm sure must by now must have explained to you how Islamophobia and anti-Islam
[Guest]: thing came up and nicely fitted in with the whole thing so you know you see somebody of
[Guest]: my age you have the Bapri demolition the whole movement which leads to demolition of the
[Guest]: Bapri masjid followed at the same time simultaneously you know mixing it with the insurgency in
[Guest]: Kashmir which really at one point in time people forget threatened to break apart people
[Guest]: really believe that Kashmir was going to break free you know most of us have forgotten what
[Guest]: the situation in Kashmir in 91 92 93 was like no it's very hard for us to now imagine that
[Guest]: situation and at that point in time I think that played into the whole narrative and eventually
[Guest]: the political rise of a certain political force and the ideology which had always existed
[Guest]: in the party the decline of other political ideologies the whole mixing of it with the
[Guest]: economic reform the rise of capitalism crony capitalism whatever you wish to wish to call
[Guest]: it or followed by a 9-11 and the global environment around the same ideology the rise of conservatism
[Guest]: art so to speak you know in a certain way all that at some level was mixing and matching
[Guest]: till the time it really burst out in the open around the same time mr. president Trump comes
[Guest]: to power and in India the BJP comes to pass it's a journey but a lot of factors which
[Guest]: were happening in the background at the same time along with a dominant narrative the rise
[Guest]: of subaltern parties the fact that they were parties which were rising which threaten the
[Guest]: existing status quo whether it was the BSP the SP the Lalu Yadav of the world they were
[Guest]: not really something the existing parties which were dominated by a certain sections
[Guest]: of caste and class could digest so there was a lot of pushback against the chain they were
[Guest]: trying to change the status quo there was a lot of pushback against the status quo and
[Guest]: because caste system is this wonderfully graded inequality so even the middle class believed
[Guest]: that there was somebody under them whom they could oppress say that they were trying to
[Guest]: target them rather than trying to really go for equality as Pratap Bhanumeta's wonderful
[Guest]: that thin essay book which clearly says that the idea of social justice in India was not
[Guest]: about seeking equality was actually imposing your own inequality on somebody by capturing
[Guest]: power so all those factors the social churn the economic churn the churn globally placed
[Guest]: in a context where Kashmir was happening where massive political mobilization was happening
[Guest]: Mandal was happening 9-11 was happening all that came together and I think we landed up
[Guest]: where we landed up I would even put Kargil as part of it the fact that the militarization
[Guest]: the of the Indian society the fact that hero worship of a certain kind of thinking which
[Guest]: took place at the India's first televised war almost like the Gulf War in the US and
[Guest]: a great comparison is how the US media covered the Vietnam War and how they covered the Gulf
[Guest]: War similarly how the Indian media coverage of the military changed with Kargil is something
[Guest]: which needs to be seen in this in the same context and we see more and more of that going
[Amit Varma]: down the line yeah it's fascinating I mean obviously it's multifactorial and much of
[Amit Varma]: what you mentioned it's stuff that I've discussed separately here though the very interesting
[Amit Varma]: point that I'm here that a guest has raised for the first time is how the Kargil war was
[Amit Varma]: possibly our first televised confrontation in a sense and could have also played a part
[Amit Varma]: which is fascinating and bears thinking about I mean the interesting thing is you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about the rise of conservatism I would say it's a rise of the right wing per se because
[Amit Varma]: Trump is pretty much an anti-conservative and even the BJP in many ways is a radical
[Amit Varma]: party where they are you know seeking to uproot so much that is embedded in our society such
[Amit Varma]: as our tolerance and such as our assimilative nature but that to be fair you know and if
[Guest]: you go back to the to the late 80s early 90s BJP is actually not a right-wing party it's
[Guest]: actually a conservative party Hindu conservative party which has its origins in the Jan Sangh
[Guest]: the Swatantra party and the Congress or which were all merged in in the in the Janata party
[Guest]: so you have the Sikandar Bhakts of the world which are part of the BJP who came from different
[Guest]: strands of society so where we have landed up today maybe hardcore right-wing ideological
[Guest]: project but where we came from or the journey that we took there were a lot of conservative
[Guest]: points which allowed it to seamlessly get through because you said you know these guys
[Guest]: are slightly different you know they're not evil in that sense they're not bad guys they're
[Guest]: just like slightly different they believe in a certain way of life and we should go
[Guest]: with them and I think in that sense the quibble I would you know I would take a quibble with
[Amit Varma]: the quibble yeah no no that's absolutely a fair point it's complex and I did a pretty
[Amit Varma]: popular episode with Vinay Sitapati on this also tracing the BJP before Modi and all of
[Amit Varma]: those years I mean in fact you know in the in 1980 when the BJP formed over the ruins
[Amit Varma]: of the Janata party it was the stated aim was Gandhi and socialism and it's really because
[Amit Varma]: Congress took a move towards a certain kind of soft Hindu tour that the BJP felt compelled
[Amit Varma]: to go in and kind of reclaim that ground which is very interesting and I'll link that episode
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes let's get back to the narrative of your life as it were and then
[Amit Varma]: you joined the army what was the army like what you expected like what attracted you
[Amit Varma]: about the army as opposed to all of the other sort of options I mean one you mentioned it's
[Amit Varma]: a glamour and men in uniform looking supremely fit and obviously you know all of that is
[Amit Varma]: there but once you entered it what was army life like what did you enjoy what did you
[Guest]: like about it what did you not like about it in the early years the training period
[Guest]: or the early years it was very enjoyable for a young man you know it opens your eyes to
[Guest]: the world and as you rightly said you know I was from a pre-internet pre-liberalization
[Guest]: generation the army actually showed you the world in some ways you know it was a totally
[Guest]: different world with the kind of it still had the a lot of traditions coming down inherited
[Guest]: from the British India which looked very glamorous at that point in time and very fascinating
[Guest]: and you know so much of discipline so much of clarity very structured regimented way
[Guest]: of thinking all that men are physically fit no bloody civilians you know what do they
[Guest]: know kind of you know if you are 21 22 year old it can be very you know intoxicating it
[Guest]: can really get to your head you'll say well guys we are superior to you know so the whole
[Guest]: idea in the military at that point in time you're superior to all these bloody people
[Guest]: you know these guys are lesser inferior human beings because you are disciplined because
[Guest]: you can run you know whatever 16 kilometers and this thing you can run 5 kilometers with
[Guest]: so much of weight in 20 minutes because you can walk straight talk straight look straight
[Guest]: and you can drill smartly you know you guys are superior human beings and so you know
[Guest]: and for any human being especially a 20 22 23 year old guy it's very easy to believe
[Guest]: that he's superior to others you know we in any case all of us believe you believe it
[Guest]: even now I believe it and now that I'm so at that point in time it just gets to your
[Guest]: head so that's wonderful so you are completely intoxicated and you love it and you know that
[Guest]: you love the fact that all this is happening a lot of people get disillusioned as young
[Guest]: army officers when they are posted to P stations because in P stations you are doing some bit
[Guest]: of training you are doing a lot of routine administration it's a very boring thankless
[Guest]: kind of job it is not that challenging fortunately I was lucky I landed up in Kashmir I landed
[Guest]: up in Srinagar early on for three years and Srinagar at that point of time was the peak
[Guest]: of militancy you know I was a place called Hafchanar it used to be the old Jekyll Eye
[Guest]: Center and it was the peak of militancy and as a sapper officer you a young sapper officer
[Guest]: you would go with various patrols you would diffuse IEDs you would make bridges you would
[Guest]: do all the other things dealing with explosives so it was a challenging time and very it felt
[Guest]: good so you were experiencing what really you one doesn't realize at that point in time
[Guest]: that one would never experience again in the military actually so I had to straight away
[Guest]: go there was pretty enjoyable pretty heady in a way and almost kind of validated the
[Guest]: decision to join the army it is as you grow in service as you do more more peace postings
[Guest]: as you you know go through routine administrative duties as you realize that it is like any
[Guest]: other organization any other bureaucracy any with all these internal politics everything
[Guest]: etc then you slowly realize that this is a different and you also grow up you also reflect
[Guest]: back at reflect at things look at things and that is how one traverses the journey but
[Guest]: for me the early years at least the first five six years of my service were really wonderful
[Guest]: were really enjoyable and they in some sense they are still remain a marker in my life
[Guest]: but but when you talk about the military or the military training there is a great phrase
[Guest]: in Juswan Singh's memoirs about military training and I actually admired it when I read it because
[Guest]: if some and he was saying that he thought about this when he was 16 he was in the National
[Guest]: Defense Academy and if somebody could think about that at 16 while he was undergoing military
[Guest]: training after coming from Mayo that it actually breaks you down military training breaks you
[Guest]: down and tries to fit you in a pattern and I try to resist breaking down without being
[Guest]: pointed out he said in my head I decided I would not break down and would not form part
[Guest]: of this pack and I thought if somebody could actually think that at 16 and do it it's amazing
[Guest]: you know most people do not even realize that they are being broken down in the name of
[Guest]: discipline in the name of motivation and we try to fit into a pattern for Juswan Singh
[Guest]: to realize it and that's why he decided to quit the army very early a failed and then
[Guest]: again went on to quit the army much later it's a great couple of pages in his memoir
[Guest]: something called a matter of honor the memoirs I thought that was a very apt description
[Guest]: but for lesser mortals like us very difficult to ascertain at an early stage in life it
[Guest]: takes much longer to realize the bit of truth in that it may not be the full truth but it
[Amit Varma]: contains a lot of truth that statement from Juswan Singh no that is in fact a staggering
[Amit Varma]: bit of self-awareness like not just for someone aged 16 but anyone I mean that kind of self-awareness
[Amit Varma]: where you can look at yourself and what's happening to you like that is pretty rare
[Amit Varma]: so you know a smaller question and a broader question and the smaller question is not so
[Amit Varma]: much smaller really but it pertains only to you therefore but it's a large question pertaining
[Amit Varma]: to you which is that Juswan Singh self-awareness and obviously not everybody can have that
[Amit Varma]: and all of that but what is your image of yourself developing through this entire period
[Amit Varma]: like of course you're a young man you get into the army you've pointed out you know
[Amit Varma]: all the seductions of it you know you're fit you're fitter than everyone you're probably
[Amit Varma]: you think you're smarter than everyone because you are being taught stuff within the army
[Amit Varma]: and all of those things are there but how is your self-image then evolving over a period
[Amit Varma]: of time like how does Sushant Singh see himself at 18 and 22 and 26 and 30 and how is that
[Guest]: kind of progressing over time it's a tough question to answer but I think at 22 23 the
[Guest]: self-reflection is more about that I'm doing a great job I'm doing a wonderful job and
[Guest]: perhaps I'm doing national service you know I'm doing something which I'm trained for
[Guest]: and I'm enjoying myself by age 30 and I'm now just trying to calculate where I was when
[Guest]: I was when I was age when I was age 30 by age 30 it is you know you really as you go
[Guest]: up the slightly up the hierarchy you become more aware of the career you know the advanced
[Guest]: career advancements the promotions the courses the routine administrative things and other
[Guest]: bureaucratic norms which are there you know you also move along in your family life you
[Guest]: probably get married you may or may not have kids or you are on your way to having kids
[Guest]: etc and that brings a different dimension to the whole life you know people expect you
[Guest]: to be more responsible your bosses which is which they don't expect you to 22 at 22 you
[Guest]: can be really brash you know and people will say oh he's a young man so you know god he's
[Guest]: got a lot of josh as they call it in the army so all those things happen at in the journey
[Guest]: yeah more self-awareness more self-reflection starts coming in and you start looking at
[Guest]: the world you start looking at the world outside by that time you know when you are when you
[Guest]: are 21 22 you are probably among the earliest lot of your friends who have settled down
[Guest]: in life and earning a salary and you know having a good job by the time you're 30 most
[Guest]: of your friends have settled down they're earning they're also living a life so you
[Guest]: are able to even if you don't want to almost compare with others and look at others and
[Guest]: see how they are doing by that time they're also settling down how their life is and then
[Guest]: you start reflecting on what could have gone better for them what could have gone better
[Guest]: for you yeah that is a time when you start looking at yourself differently you've done
[Guest]: a couple of peace postings courses etc you start wanting to do well in your career all
[Amit Varma]: those things take place at that point in time so and at this point i'd also sort of like
[Amit Varma]: to ask you about like i find it interesting that you were sort of into separate bubbles
[Amit Varma]: at two different points in time one of which you already mentioned it's the army bubble
[Amit Varma]: where you know people within the army will look at themselves as different from the civilians
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps a little superior but the other interesting bubble is the bubble which you
[Amit Varma]: are in when you are in kashmir kashmiri people are you know one thing and you are in a bubble
[Amit Varma]: of your own as somebody from india from mainland india somebody who is in the army and in a
[Amit Varma]: sense there is at some level surely some sense where the local people look upon you with
[Amit Varma]: hostility as if you are oppressors you are kind of an other for them what was that sort
[Amit Varma]: of period alike like what if like first of all for a person in the army in kashmir at
[Amit Varma]: that point what is your approach towards the local population what is their approach towards
[Amit Varma]: you and how does that thinking kind of deepen as the years go by yeah so the period that
[Guest]: i'm talking about that we are discussing is early 90s and at that point in time the the
[Guest]: situation was very tense in kashmir and the army was really trying to regain control in
[Guest]: some ways there was no civilian government in place in kashmir and things had been very
[Guest]: very bad a lot of army units a lot of paramilitary forces had been had been pushed inside the
[Guest]: pushed inside the valley there was a of course a lot of hostility from the kashmiris towards
[Guest]: the security forces but the power equation was clear the power was with the security
[Guest]: forces who were trying to establish some kind of order some kind of you know state power
[Guest]: in the leave the stamp of state power at that point in time trying to deal both with the
[Guest]: militancy or the armed militancy that was support being supported by the pakistan while
[Guest]: also trying to find a way to deal with the civilian population this is the period in
[Guest]: kashmir where it is more about dealing with the armed militancy and regaining some kind
[Guest]: of control over the over the violence in the in the kashmir valley and there was of course
[Guest]: as i said a lot of hostility which one could see and people the are the soldiers the officers
[Guest]: a lot of them were dying a lot of them were losing their lives a lot of militants were
[Guest]: coming in from well trained from pakistan many others were coming who had fought in
[Guest]: afghanistan and the after against the soviet union and had been freed after the war got
[Guest]: over and all were fighting with the taliban or the forces and were coming back well trained
[Guest]: it was a very tough period indian army was itself learning how to deal with this kind
[Guest]: of counter-insurgency amit as you know indian army had only dealt with counter-insurgency
[Guest]: in nagaland before that or in sri lanka and sri lanka was a totally different kind of
[Guest]: experience against the ltd a lot of lessons which were learned from the ltd could not
[Guest]: be actually you know used against these militant these militants who were trained in a in a
[Guest]: totally different frame and were using completely different things to give you an example the
[Guest]: kind of ieds or the improvised explosive devices that the ltd used were more like vietnam in
[Guest]: that sense you know bamboo sticks you know all those deceptive deceptive kind of things
[Guest]: but what you saw here was far more technologically advanced electronics almost like with remote
[Guest]: control ids and all those other kind of things pressure switches but things which were far
[Guest]: more sophisticated or different the tactics were different these were far more battle-hardened
[Guest]: people they had better weaponry in that sense and the indian army as you know and the indian
[Guest]: armed forces since the time of 1950s in nagaland do not use air power do not use heavy weaponry
[Guest]: when i say heavy weaponry they do not use mortars they do not use artillery against
[Guest]: any of the armed militancy the very rare example is the manipur thing in the late 1960s where
[Guest]: air power was used so that actually you know makes it almost if i may say a battle of equals
[Guest]: so to speak that he also the militant also has an ak-47 i also have an ak-47 who is better
[Guest]: with the weapon will win but it is not like a duel in that sense it's of course there
[Guest]: are more things in the numbers the understanding of the terrain the local support all those
[Guest]: factors come into play so it was a very tough period the sympathy for the local population
[Guest]: was limited at that point in time as the target was militancy and suppressing the violence
[Guest]: so that is how it was at that point in time and the whole idea was about wresting back
[Guest]: control of kashmir and to ensure that it is that it remains a part of india and the sovereignty
[Guest]: of the indian state is not is not harmed a lot of it was directed towards that i wrote
[Amit Varma]: a column a few years ago which was about sort of how the situation in kashmir kind of evolved
[Amit Varma]: and one of the things i wrote about in that was exactly what you said about counterinsurgency
[Amit Varma]: which you know till in fact the iraq war even the americans really hadn't figured it out
[Amit Varma]: david galula wrote a famous book a few decades ago called counterinsurgency warfare theory
[Amit Varma]: and practice and one of the early practitioners of this kind of warfare was in fact mao one
[Amit Varma]: of mao's generals defined counterinsurgency as quote 20 military action and 80 political
[Amit Varma]: and te lawrence and seven pillars of wisdom once spoke about how quote war upon rebellion
[Amit Varma]: was messy and slow like eating soup with a knife stop quote and and eating soup with
[Amit Varma]: a knife in fact seems a very sort of a vivid description of what it would have felt like
[Amit Varma]: and one of the points that they kind of made and there's a great book by fred kaplan called
[Amit Varma]: i think the insurgents about the insurgents within the american army including david petraeus
[Amit Varma]: who tried to sort of bring this new wisdom to the fore after the iraq war went downhill
[Amit Varma]: but talk about again go back to the 20 military 80 political part and say that what an army
[Amit Varma]: must do in any situation of such insurgency is what they call clear build hold that first
[Amit Varma]: you clear the ground of all the terrorists who are coming from outside and then you kind
[Amit Varma]: of consolidate there and all of that and a lot of it involves getting the local population
[Amit Varma]: to your side and this seems to me to have been a spectacular failure of the indian army
[Amit Varma]: in kashmir that essentially the indian administration there i won't just say the army alienated
[Amit Varma]: local kashmiris and a lot of that just happened uh the way the incentives went down for example
[Amit Varma]: david devadas wrote a book called the generation of rage in kashmir where at one point he talks
[Amit Varma]: about how uh you know the number of kills the number of terrorists killed became a metric
[Amit Varma]: for the advancement of the forces so he speaks about how court officers and units sometimes
[Amit Varma]: competed to notch up higher numbers stop court he talks about how there was a bump him off
[Amit Varma]: culture suspects were routinely killed in encounters he gives cases where innocent people
[Amit Varma]: are taken from one area to the other killed past of a terrorist to get rewards and this
[Amit Varma]: kind of continues like devdas for example there's one para from his book which i'd quoted
[Amit Varma]: in my column which struck me as striking where he writes quote waheed para experienced this
[Amit Varma]: in 2005 when he was in his late teens a bsf officer accused him of being a militant dramatically
[Amit Varma]: holding a pistol to his head and then tortured him mentally until he broke down he was released
[Amit Varma]: after a minister in the state government intervened but the swaggering officer threatened while
[Amit Varma]: letting him go that he would discover weapons from the car and then blow up that car with
[Amit Varma]: the boy in it the boy was studying in class 11 when he became a victim of such torture
[Amit Varma]: and threats the reason was greed that officer wanted the boy's new black indigo car stop
[Amit Varma]: court and there was a das's overall point is that the situation in kashmir was actually
[Amit Varma]: becoming much better you know during the time vajpayee had his talks with nawaz sharif and
[Amit Varma]: you know in the middle of the auties but it suddenly became much worse because the administration
[Amit Varma]: just kept treating the locals in a sense of way the british treated us if not far worse
[Amit Varma]: looking back in that period with you know perhaps a lot of the wisdom you have in hindsight
[Amit Varma]: as well would you say that the indian army made big mistakes there in the 1990s and if
[Guest]: so what were they so uh i made a very long question and very tough question to answer
[Guest]: for a former army man but let me put this the insurgency and the counter-insurgency
[Guest]: in kashmir at least what i have understood the way i look at it is actually divided into
[Guest]: few you know parts one is the period between 89 and 96 and of course there are multiple
[Guest]: parts to it the early part is jklf led and then the jklf declines jklf is the urban local
[Guest]: you know kashmiri azadi kind of a group which is replaced by a more pro-pakistan uh his
[Guest]: bill mujahideen which actually you know suppresses the jklf and almost finished the jklf at that
[Guest]: point in time then comes the period of the suicide bombers the suicide attackers the fedayeen
[Guest]: who start attacking and this is all happening within the 90s until 96 and i put 96 as a
[Guest]: marker because of the elections that took place which were supposedly successful both
[Guest]: the lok sabha as well as the assembly elections assembly elections brought the farooq abdullah
[Guest]: government to government to power and uh around that same time you have the counter-insurgents
[Guest]: the kokapare and the and the others who were propped up by the state to fight against the
[Guest]: insurgency the whole endeavor at that point in time in this period when you look from
[Guest]: the angle of the state indian state at that point in time was somehow get control of the
[Guest]: situation and the only thing that the metric or the metric for can bringing the control
[Guest]: was can i suppress the violence and i know for a fact that the idea manoj joshi probably
[Guest]: has quoted in his book on kashmir about that period is very clear that the why is the local
[Guest]: afraid of the militant and not afraid of the army we may in hindsight look at it wrongly
[Guest]: but try to think of an institution a state an organization under tremendous pressure
[Guest]: and almost an instrument of last resort believing that things were slipping away and trying
[Guest]: to regain control that was the mindset with which that period was approached till 96.
[Guest]: so in 1996 farooq abdullah comes to power with a huge majority and i think there is
[Guest]: a shift that takes place in kashmir around that time and i'm not going to say the shift
[Guest]: is radical in some way but there is some semblance of democracy at that point in time the army's
[Guest]: behavior the other not army only the whole behavior of the security forces changes and
[Guest]: i saw this with my own eyes even in a place like srinagar the behavior changes you know
[Guest]: people could walk up to their local mla etc who could come if there was something wrong
[Guest]: or something which was harsh being done by the security forces and could represent even
[Guest]: a semblance of democracy could actually allow that to happen in kashmir at that point in
[Guest]: time from 96 till almost 2003 2003 is when the ceasefire takes place on the line of control
[Guest]: and this is the peak of the vashpayee musharraf engagement you know this is really the high
[Guest]: point of that engagement is a totally different phase of insurgency where actually violence
[Guest]: does not come down but army the security forces response becomes less harsher now you know
[Guest]: i'm not going to argue with you and say oh everything was fine everything was hunky-dory
[Guest]: and you know we were like completely following everything in the court but you know but this
[Guest]: is the period when the chiefs of army staffs commandments are told to everyone people are
[Guest]: actually sent behind bars people are punished through court marshals for any excesses people
[Guest]: are being held to account in whatever manner that they were being held to account whether
[Guest]: through the channels of the military or through other channels of the of the state and this
[Guest]: is a time when violence actually does not go down in 2001 if i'm not wrong is the peak
[Guest]: of militancy in kashmir in terms of fatality at some three thousand four thousand people
[Guest]: died in kashmir in 2001 from 2003 when the ceasefire takes place and 2001 is actually
[Guest]: when Musharraf goes on television and says they know that we will stop all militant training
[Guest]: we will do everything etc etc 2001 2002 and by 2003 you have the ceasefire the militancy
[Guest]: suddenly comes down and by 2012 we have what 100 odd people dead and i think 2012 is the
[Guest]: lowest in militancy and then it again it's a secular decline almost like 400 odds 300
[Guest]: or 200 or 100 odd like it's like and the 2012 if i'm not wrong was a period when less people
[Guest]: died in kashmir then they died before 89 and you know normal robberies etc whatever violence
[Guest]: you would have in the on these streets and towards 2012 there's a rise which really
[Guest]: shoots through the roof post 2015 and 2016 burhanwani so in the whole thing however put
[Guest]: it is you know 89 to 96 more desperate phase you know when you're trying to regain some
[Guest]: amount of control 96 to 2003 you know most stable kind of you know more trying to find
[Guest]: a balance between how to use the strong arm as well as trying to win the hearts and minds
[Guest]: so to speak but there's a contestation that is going on it's not a perfect thing but it's
[Guest]: a contestation that is going on and then from 2003 there's a militancy is coming down muftis
[Guest]: forms a government in pdp forms a government with congress and then omar comes to power
[Guest]: with congress the state governments is asserting their power they're part of this whole structure
[Guest]: which is created in in srinagar and jammu where they head the committees which have
[Guest]: the military within it and from 2003 to 2014-15 is a totally different phase of militancy in
[Guest]: kashmir and it is around 2015-2016 that militancy and now this time more local than supported by
[Guest]: pakistan really shoots through the roof so i mean i don't know if you are aware but this year so far
[Guest]: every single militant who has been killed in kashmir valley is a local there is no foreign
[Guest]: militant yeah this is stunning data you know we have i don't think in the last 30 years we have
[Guest]: ever had a year where there was no foreign militant killed so if it continues i don't know whether it
[Guest]: will continue or not but till a few days back no foreign militant had been killed and that is the
[Guest]: phase in which i think the army's response becomes more and more strong armed response which we saw
[Guest]: in south kashmir which we saw in the in the photograph of that of the gentleman being taken
[Guest]: on a burnout of a jeep and all those kind of visual public images which were not condemned by
[Guest]: the state or people were not punished for those transgressions but being justified and in some
[Guest]: cases even being rewarded for what they were doing at that point in time and i think that's the
[Guest]: journey kashmir has seen in some ways it's not been a happy journey for kashmiris it's not been
[Guest]: a happy journey for the army i don't think any institution benefits by being in this kind of
[Guest]: environment for a long period of time and probably there was a time when things could have been
[Guest]: settled better if the state administration had been much more stronger much more powerful if
[Guest]: the army had been more willing to take certain amount of risk if pakistan was not as perfidious
[Guest]: as it was if probably afghanistan was not in turmoil and the americans were not trying to
[Guest]: pacify it with pakistani support all those kind of things what ifs there are a lot of counterfactual
[Guest]: there are a lot of what ifs that can be used but unfortunately now we are at a point in kashmir
[Guest]: where it looks pretty bad from the perspective of the kashmiris any kashmiri you speak to
[Guest]: doesn't really have nice things to say about the the indian state and that's pretty hurtful for
[Amit Varma]: most of us yeah no that chronology dovetails exactly what with what devdas describes in his
[Amit Varma]: book in fact earlier i said the watch by nawaz sharif talks but spoken typo obviously i meant
[Amit Varma]: watched by musharraf so around 2003 it starts getting better but what happens and this is
[Amit Varma]: probably not just an army issue it's a bsf issue it's a police issue like devdas in his book writes
[Amit Varma]: about how the people who became senior police officers in the late aughties were people who
[Amit Varma]: grew up at the height of the insurrection so they were used to strong arm methods there was
[Amit Varma]: massive rent seeking because the state was using its power there was daily humiliation like at one
[Amit Varma]: point he writes quote most men had at some point been abused slapped or kicked on their way after
[Amit Varma]: a soldier had looked at their id card or they had watched a father or an uncle being slapped
[Amit Varma]: or ordered to do squats while holding his ears or made to stand on his hands with his feet propped
[Amit Varma]: against a wall on a public road while neighbors and relatives passed by humiliation was one of
[Amit Varma]: the keys to control stop quote entirely sounding worse than the british were with us and the
[Amit Varma]: question here is how do we think of something like legitimacy like you actually served in
[Amit Varma]: kashmir at one point in the early 90s and like you said this is in the first phase where a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the militancy was coming from outside you've said that the locals trusted the army more than
[Amit Varma]: the militants and in a sense they are caught between a rock and a hard place but this question
[Amit Varma]: of how legitimate you are considered to me is really important because if you're not considered
[Amit Varma]: legitimate if you're looked upon as an occupier then every arrest is an abduction everyone who
[Amit Varma]: every local who dies for whatever reason it can be looked upon as a murder so what was your
[Amit Varma]: experience there in kashmir like did it evolve over a period of time and do you feel that in a
[Amit Varma]: sense you know like going back to that whole counterinsurgency formula that is 20 percent
[Amit Varma]: military and 80 percent political is that something you agree with and was this something that the
[Amit Varma]: army was not equipped to do that you are equipped to win the military part of it how the hell do you
[Amit Varma]: do the rest of it in hindsight when we look back at that period what are the kind of failings that
[Amit Varma]: one can see and would have would the army having learned from all of those lessons be in a better
[Amit Varma]: place to do the job if you had to sort of in a groundhog kind of groundhog day kind of way
[Guest]: relive history again two things one is that the army actually acted against a lot of misdemeanors
[Guest]: so i will not say that every misdemeanor was punished but everything wrong that was reported
[Guest]: or brought into the public domain people did get punished you know people went behind bars people
[Guest]: suffered for their you know putting their promotions all those things they were not taken lightly in
[Guest]: that sense maybe the reason may not be human rights per se the reason maybe that you did the
[Guest]: institution did not want the discipline to go down maybe the reason was that institution did
[Guest]: not want it to be perceived badly by the public a larger public large indian public maybe that's
[Guest]: the the narrative in the country was different the larger political administrative setup in the
[Guest]: government in the country thought different maybe the courts in the country thought differently at
[Guest]: that point in time so there was no reward for doing something wrong you know if you got caught
[Guest]: you know you were in trouble there's no doubt about that and people did get punished for it
[Guest]: that that's something which we must recognize so it's not that as if it was free for all that
[Guest]: everything that went unpunished and went or was rewarded in that place that's not true in army's
[Guest]: defense i must say that in the defense of the security forces or the or the indian state now
[Guest]: that's debatable whether it was up to the right extent when it should have been done whether it
[Guest]: really really allowed us to build the trust and you know we have the examples of the americans in
[Guest]: vietnam americans in afghanistan iraq you know this is a whole debate which is like none of us
[Guest]: have the answers to that debate in that sense could the army have provided the final solution
[Guest]: or the and i'm not using the final solution in the term not not in court unfortunate choice of words
[Guest]: sorry you know could the army have provided a more lasting permanent solution to the problem
[Guest]: in that sense on its own i don't think that was possible by the very nature of the army
[Guest]: without the other arms of the state taking their responsibility including the political leadership
[Guest]: and being supported by the central in a big way and those opportunities were there at multiple
[Guest]: points in time especially when the violence has subsided in the early 2010s and then in the earlier
[Guest]: part of the previous decade there was a possibility that something like you know you remember the
[Guest]: debate around the removal of afspa from urban areas of kashmir which was supported by mr pijat
[Guest]: ambram as the home minister and others but the upward was opposed by the army and the defense
[Guest]: ministry and the then defense minister ak antony and it could not be removed there were moments
[Guest]: which were not grasped in kashmir very clearly and you know these were movements which were not
[Guest]: grasped politically more than by the military i would not want the military to go and start
[Guest]: telling the politician how to do politics you know that would be more like pakistan than with india
[Guest]: so yeah military was doing what it was being told to do what it thought was the right thing to do
[Guest]: within the domain of independence that it was given within the task that it was given
[Guest]: there were mistakes made i think everybody in the army would accept that there were mistakes made
[Guest]: some of them went unpunished some of them were of course punished things could have been done
[Guest]: better things would have been done in a much smarter way much better way and but the nature
[Guest]: of the organization the nature of the institution the certain inherent characteristics through which
[Guest]: the military looks at various roles and military is not the police for a reason or not the
[Guest]: gendarmerie or the paramilitary for a reason to come into play because you at the end of the day
[Guest]: you do not want to reduce the military to a paramilitary force or to a police force because
[Guest]: it has to deal with an external enemy and deal with an external entity there's a psychological
[Guest]: mindset of the organization of the institution which is different from other security forces
[Guest]: and which does come into play at many points in time it is also that you know if the paramilitary
[Guest]: forces fail they will call in the army if the police fails they'll call in the paramilitary
[Guest]: forces but if the army fails whom do you call in you know you really cannot call in anybody so
[Guest]: i think that pressure of having to succeed you know if i fail then there's nothing after me
[Guest]: it's almost like the number seven or number eight batsman in cricket if i failed the pressure of
[Guest]: somebody you know batting at that other thing i'm trivializing the matter but but what i'm saying is
[Guest]: that nothing after me you know i'm so i really need to so you know people can make decisions
[Guest]: under that kind of pressure which are not the decisions they would look back very fondly at
[Guest]: a few years down the line and i think that's how i would characterize it that's how i would
[Amit Varma]: i would put it across yeah that analogy about the number seven batsman is spoken like a true
[Amit Varma]: 80s kid because this was true in the 80s number seven out but today today we have such pleasant
[Amit Varma]: batting depth so you know again to come out of the army context just as someone who's kind of
[Amit Varma]: lived in kashmir and i assume you have some familiarity and affection which goes beyond
[Amit Varma]: whatever your army experience might have been what do you feel when you look at it today like
[Amit Varma]: i thought what happened a couple of years back and of course i had a great episode on this with
[Amit Varma]: our mutual friend srinath raghavan i remember being very despondent at the time because i
[Amit Varma]: thought india has lost kashmir for two decades like i cannot and especially after what has
[Amit Varma]: happened since where for months and months they have no internet and i mean everything that
[Amit Varma]: happened just felt that it was a huge turning point towards the worst what's your sense of
[Guest]: all of that yeah that episode with srinath was by the way a great episode srinath is a very dear
[Guest]: friend srinath is a very dear friend and what more can i say actually i mean it's very very sad in
[Guest]: fact you know that kashmir is the place that it is in and the kashmiris had to undergo all that
[Guest]: they have undergone in the last couple of last couple of years including denial of basic rights
[Guest]: like the whether it be internet or whether it be freedom to move or to do other things and the
[Guest]: whole characterization of kashmiris as being something different from indians and i'm saying
[Guest]: indians in the inverted commas the way the whole narrative has been framed on certain news
[Guest]: television channels and the way it has been politically exploited leaves me very very
[Guest]: despondent and you know it's it raises the fundamental question are we in kashmir for
[Guest]: the land or are we in kashmir also for the people you know we really have let the kashmiris down
[Guest]: in a big way and for all those of us who think that we may not speak for kashmiris today because
[Guest]: it doesn't really matter they are one part of the thing and they have a different history
[Guest]: narrative context may realize sooner or rather than later that it can then come to other parts
[Guest]: of the of the country as well one of my closest friends who's a very reputed kashmiri journalist
[Guest]: and i'm not going to name him here but he says that guys don't think that what's happening in
[Guest]: kashmir won't happen in india tomorrow a lot of this is what is being tried there is then being
[Guest]: used in the rest of the country so i think that's something indians if not for out of any altruistic
[Guest]: motives or you know reasons of ideology at least for their self-preservation and for their
[Guest]: self-interest a lot of people should actually think about kashmiris and stand in their support or
[Guest]: not allow the violation of human rights in kashmir to the extent that has happened in the last couple
[Amit Varma]: of years at least no it's tragic and i actually lament while uh that it might even be too late
[Amit Varma]: for that slide i mean it reminds you of the naimola poem right where first they came for a and i didn't
[Amit Varma]: speak up and then they came for b and then they came for c and then they came for d and then they
[Amit Varma]: came for me and there was no one to speak up for me broadly and you see right in fact playing out
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that when 370 was repealed kejriwal actually became a cheerleader for the government
[Amit Varma]: and put out that tweet about how he supports a move and now they've come for him and now they've
[Amit Varma]: come for delhi and what are you going to do and the larger mindset which applies to all of us and
[Amit Varma]: and your friend is absolutely right when he says that it holds a lesson for all of us the larger
[Amit Varma]: mindset is that the state looks at itself as a colonial state did in the sense that they are
[Amit Varma]: our rulers and we are the subjects and the moment you become subjects and not citizens
[Amit Varma]: then everything is up for grabs and first it happened to the kashmiris but there's no reason
[Amit Varma]: that if that mindset is pervasive and it mindset is even pervasive in the people not just in the
[Amit Varma]: state then what are you kind of going to do about it so yeah so amit the whole point is as you
[Guest]: rightly said uh citizens not subjects and these citizens what is the difference between a citizen
[Guest]: and a subject that a citizen has certain inalienable no rights which are bestowed upon
[Guest]: and it is essentially we do not see those rights being spoken of we see that trust the state trust
[Guest]: an individual you know he's giving you this she's giving you that take it and be happy you know so
[Guest]: and so so much of amount of money is coming it's not that i have certain rights which are which
[Guest]: are enshrined to me and which are enshrined to me not only in the indian constitution
[Guest]: but even without the indian constitution as a human being amit many people forget that the
[Guest]: cases for habeas corpus which were upheld by the various high courts during the emergency
[Guest]: and this is beautifully explained in pratina vanil and christophe jeffrello's new book on
[Guest]: the emergency were not upheld because of the constitution because constitution was an abeyance
[Guest]: fundamental rights were never they were upheld on the grounds that certain rights are inalienable
[Guest]: to a person to a human being with or without the constitution and habeas corpus is one of those
[Guest]: rights in today's times the habeas corpus is not being upheld you know you habeas corpus petitions
[Guest]: have been lying for for months a habeas corpus is the very basic fundamental right of democracy
[Guest]: how can you have a liberal democracy if habeas corpus is not being upheld the supreme court
[Guest]: with due respect you know and i you and i may be charged for contempt of court but supreme
[Guest]: court with due respect saying that you know you can go but not do politics okay go and see him
[Guest]: don't touch him you know to give him medicine but don't do this that is not habeas corpus present
[Guest]: the guy why is he being kept behind bar or the fact that mehbooba mufti or or farooq abdullah
[Guest]: or omar abdullah the gates were being shut down during the ddc elections and they're not being
[Guest]: allowed to go out how do you justify that images being put out and this goes beyond the constitution
[Guest]: this goes to us as human beings these are certain rights which which over the years have emerged and
[Guest]: this is how it those rights were appealed during the emergency as well by the various high courts
[Guest]: and you know how it went on from there the supreme court came in and the new new laws were brought in
[Guest]: in the 42nd amendment etc etc but this is what we have completely forgotten when it comes to the
[Guest]: kashmiris and to the way the indians all the institutions of the indian state have dealt with
[Guest]: the situation it's almost like a death with thousand cuts that the various institutions
[Guest]: of the state whether it is the parliament whether it is the uh whether it is the judiciary whether
[Guest]: it is the other accountable constitutional bodies who have not really upheld their charter in that
[Amit Varma]: sense no that's a fantastic point and it's something that i will again underscore do you
[Amit Varma]: underscore it that you know that our rights are not something that are granted to us by a benevolent
[Amit Varma]: state that we necessarily require a constitution to have we are all human beings we have some
[Amit Varma]: autonomy some dignity and all of that and i'm glad you sort of share that uh lockian vision as it
[Amit Varma]: were almost of the world yeah i mean but before we sort of descend into mutual despair i think
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break think some happy thoughts and come back and talk about the
[Amit Varma]: army and the rest of your journey and where we stand today right after that
[Amit Varma]: on the scene and the unseen i often speak about positive some games well if you want to be
[Amit Varma]: surrounded by beauty and you love fine art i have a win-win proposition for you head on over to
[Amit Varma]: indiancolors.com indian colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary
[Amit Varma]: artists in india and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags pouches and home
[Amit Varma]: decor items you get to surround yourself with the finest modern indian art at affordable prices
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties for every product you buy win-win game the indian colors new ranges in
[Amit Varma]: and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women and casual shirts for men with standout
[Amit Varma]: motifs by artists such as tanmay samanta manisha ghera baswari shruti nelson pradeep mishra and
[Amit Varma]: jaydeep herota stay home but dress smart and if you're missing your friends in these lockdown
[Amit Varma]: days worry not you can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from indian
[Amit Varma]: colors corporate gifting is also available so head on over to indiancolors.com that's colors
[Amit Varma]: with an ou and make art a part of your life and hey for a 15 discount use the code unseen
[Amit Varma]: that's right unseen for 15 off at indiancolors.com
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene in the unseen i'm chatting with sushant singh about um you know
[Amit Varma]: his time both in the army and later as an uh analyst and a serious thinker on um all of these
[Amit Varma]: issues and i'm now going to like ask you about the army per se like what is very interesting is
[Amit Varma]: that we got a slice of the same army that pakistan got a slice off and this was a colonial era army
[Amit Varma]: which was set up to essentially you know to control the people you know stephen wilkinson
[Amit Varma]: and his book army and nation writes about how you know the british had this vision of india as
[Amit Varma]: you know they divided it neatly into races and castes and all that so they picked from what
[Amit Varma]: they call the martial races punjabis and so on and they put them in the army to control the rest of
[Amit Varma]: the people and uh and you know there was always this fear that what is going to happen after
[Amit Varma]: independence will there be clashes and what we saw and you know when ambedkar argued for a separate
[Amit Varma]: pakistan one of the kind of you know in his 1941 book i think thoughts on pakistan one of his
[Amit Varma]: points was that what's going to happen with the army and how's that dynamic going to play out and
[Amit Varma]: we saw how it played out in pakistan but in india it didn't play out that way because there was a
[Amit Varma]: great sort of consciousness of what could go wrong and what we needed to do in the nation that we
[Amit Varma]: were tell me a little bit about that period because it seems crucial we could have gone in another
[Amit Varma]: direction of course the way we didn't is because of certain decisions made in 47 certain directions
[Amit Varma]: we took with regard to the army tell me about how the army evolved in the decades after independence
[Guest]: and what really was going on there so you know wilkinson steven wilkinson's book is absolutely
[Guest]: fantastic and the last chapter actually answers this question which you have raised you know he
[Guest]: talks about the various coup proofing measures that were taken the whole idea of race and how
[Guest]: you know the army tried to move away from the idea of caste space this thing and try to control who
[Guest]: became what kind of percentages of people that they had so that there could be no dominant group
[Guest]: could control the army and the third point which he makes and as well as maya tudor makes my tutor
[Guest]: has a fantastic book a very thin book black cover book name probably i'll send you over email which
[Guest]: we can add in the notes which india and pakistan actually took different paths and why one remained
[Guest]: democratic and the other didn't and the fact that the congress party was a more institutionalized
[Guest]: structure which operated in a manner which could deal with the diversity of the country
[Guest]: allowed it to deal with the army as a more representative popular institution of the
[Guest]: country could deal with the army in a much better manner it was not easy as you know with karyapa
[Guest]: and with a lot of others there was there were there were periods of great tension and pushback
[Guest]: at some point in time but because of the institutionalized nature of the indian polity
[Guest]: and the leadership and the and certain steps that they took they could handle it one point which
[Guest]: nobody actually speaks about amit and which i think needs to be understood is that the indian
[Guest]: army did not emerge out of the independence movement it was not an army of the revolution
[Guest]: it is not the pla the pla is an army of the communist party of china it is not the army
[Guest]: of the chinese state or it is not even army of various latin american state or southeast asian
[Guest]: states who fought for the freedom of the country along with the you know certain people locals
[Guest]: and then once they became free it became the national army the indian army became a national
[Guest]: army despite being a colonial army it was a fantastic switch which it did which it played
[Guest]: by fundamentally saying that we are a professional force we are a very professional army we do our
[Guest]: job professionally we were playing our role as a professional army earlier and we are playing our
[Guest]: job as a professional army now now our rulers are different there is a democratic norms under which
[Guest]: we are operating and we will continue to operate within these norms it is only in post 71 stephen
[Guest]: cohen says post 71 many of us may say post 90s post late 80s it starts taking a more nationalistic
[Guest]: tone where the army starts representing the nation or becomes the epitome of the nation
[Guest]: and when then it starts happening it of course starts controlling the mind space of the people
[Guest]: farmer has far greater influence on policy making then when it is you know slightly cut off from the
[Guest]: mainstream politics in that sense and i think the fact that it was not an army which emerged
[Guest]: out of the independence movement which slightly put it slightly on the back foot and also allowed
[Guest]: it to recraft reimagine its role its position in the new setup in india post independence which
[Guest]: allowed indians to along with all the other factors that wilkinson and two dimension allows india to
[Guest]: actually not go the pakistan way so pakistan actually does not have a freedom movement
[Guest]: it's not something that they really fought for from the british in that sense unlike the indians
[Guest]: so so it's a totally different experience that they undergo and of course then they lose liaka
[Guest]: they lose jinnah very early they lose liaka immediately after that there's huge turbulence
[Guest]: and then then ayub realizes that you know they are healed when they go and clean karachi over
[Guest]: four or five days they're hailed as this great at this great institution and then he suddenly
[Guest]: realizes that why am i the defense minister the army chief why can't i be the governor general
[Guest]: of the country and you know and the whole thing completely it takes a totally different turn
[Guest]: in india in contrast the the generals who try to get into politics did not do well karepa fought
[Guest]: couple of elections did not do well at all it was from one of the constituencies in bombay
[Guest]: uh that he lost a lot of uh other people uh who are the military officers uh did not do well when
[Guest]: they tried to you know bring out their military past so people like just one thing and others
[Guest]: the only military officers who has really gone up the chain and become the defense minister the
[Guest]: foreign minister the finance minister was just one thing and i think he really did not tom-tom
[Amit Varma]: his military background to that to that extent so a couple of threads and i'll go through them
[Amit Varma]: one by one and the first of those threads is that obviously the china war happens and that kind of
[Amit Varma]: changes the civil military dynamic where there is this sense that there wasn't enough dialogue
[Amit Varma]: between the army and the government and the army was asked to do things which it could not have
[Amit Varma]: done and had there been a proper processes in place of dialogue between the two it would not
[Amit Varma]: have happened what is also happening at this time is that nehru sensibly doesn't want what happened
[Amit Varma]: in pakistan or what would happen in pakistan to happen here so there is significant civilian
[Amit Varma]: control over the military but a lot of this happens in a lot of this takes the form of
[Amit Varma]: bureaucratic control where there is a ministry with all his boffins and all of that who are now
[Amit Varma]: in charge of the entire armed forces and obviously this has a proximate effect of keeping the military
[Amit Varma]: away from politics but does it have also have an ultimate effect or an effect down the line a
[Amit Varma]: second order effect of sort of ossifying processes where the in the same sense that the bureaucracy
[Amit Varma]: all over india governance has become so ossified and almost paralyzed in certain ways does a similar
[Amit Varma]: thing happen in the army especially you've i mean written at great length about how there just isn't
[Amit Varma]: enough money it's not a modern force it's not being modernized and you almost see sort of the
[Amit Varma]: negative impact of that what's your sense on what this uh you know this dynamic is of this
[Amit Varma]: bureaucratic control over the army and the pros and the cons and the directions is going in 1962
[Guest]: is a complicated one i'm sure you did the episode with srinath you did one episode with srinath and
[Guest]: his first book i haven't done one specifically on china but in the caa the war and peace in
[Guest]: modern india his first book actually talks about it in great yeah so the so the whole reality and
[Guest]: the myth of how much of it was abdication of civilian responsibility and how much of it was
[Guest]: bureaucratic control uh but yes it is true to a great extent that at least the the armed forces
[Guest]: not only the army but the armed forces believe uh that bureaucratic control has been detrimental
[Guest]: to their growth and to their development and that has allowed that has kept them away from the
[Guest]: political leadership which has been a constant complaint constant complaint that we are not
[Guest]: under bureaucratic civilian control does not mean bureaucratic control it means political control
[Guest]: or parliamentary control by to the uh controlled by the people through the parliament or through
[Guest]: the political leadership now that's a debatable point you know it's something there are two sides
[Guest]: to it all political executives operate through bureaucracies bureaucracies are normal instruments
[Guest]: including civilian bureaucracies and if you replace civilian bureaucracies with military
[Guest]: bureaucracies would they be operating any differently now that's a question which is
[Guest]: a difficult question to answer but that's a question which most people grapple with and
[Guest]: i do not have an answer to could india have done better if there was less bureaucratic control and
[Guest]: the and the armed forces were given more independence it's a question which is very
[Guest]: difficult to answer and i don't think we still have an answer to that over the years especially
[Guest]: in the last 20-25 years a lot of freedom a lot of independence has come to the armed forces
[Guest]: and come to the military leadership you know the 1971 war is a great example of where the
[Guest]: political leadership and the and the military worked closely that was a success but the fact
[Guest]: that even blue star or ipkf or pawan operation pawan there also the military leadership was very
[Guest]: closely aligned with the political leadership or brass tacks where india and pakistan almost came
[Guest]: to war in 86 those things also happened when the political when the military leadership was very
[Guest]: closely aligned the budgets were very high period of highest military budgets highest defense
[Guest]: budgets are the period of mid-80s in rajiv's time they are the cross four percent of the gdp at that
[Guest]: point in time we are now down to what two percent or something something like that so it is that
[Guest]: period even in that period that doesn't lead to great great results great outcomes in that sense
[Guest]: so it is very hard to say what the right mix is and what leads to the right answers and what
[Guest]: doesn't lead to the right answers is there a right balance and i think that's a very dynamic balance
[Guest]: what most people think is that there's a static balance you know you arrive at a solution and
[Guest]: that that's what it remains i think when a military conflict is imminent or when the army's
[Guest]: armed forces are fighting a war or they're about to fight a war then the balance of civil relationships
[Guest]: would be completely different from a peace time scenario where the political leadership would
[Guest]: probably be more hands-off allowing the military to train for itself two things for itself the
[Guest]: fundamental thing where i think most people fail to understand civil military relations is if you
[Guest]: look at it only through the prism of the relationship between the military as an institution
[Guest]: and the civilian leadership as an institution it is actually not that it deals with the whole of
[Guest]: the society the military's position in the society how military affects the society it also deals
[Guest]: with how military deals with politics how does it work with uh operating politics how does it look
[Guest]: at politics and essentially the point that i'm trying to make is that it is not a two circle
[Guest]: thing they're just not two points which are engaging with each other there's also a larger
[Guest]: blob of the public which is there to which the democratically elected leadership is responding
[Guest]: which is also being influenced by the army when the army deals with this larger blob
[Guest]: it indirectly can pressurize the political leadership to take various decisions that it
[Guest]: takes so it is just not that there's a bold line which goes between whatever you want to call it
[Guest]: the civilian executive and the military leadership there is also a big dashed line which goes to this
[Guest]: blob called the larger public opinion and which can be operated through the media as primarily
[Guest]: media is the vehicle through which it operates and through which it allows you to shape the
[Guest]: narrative and there are numerous examples of this we spoke about the removal of afspa from the urban
[Guest]: areas of kashmir in the uh in over of the last time there is another example is the withdrawal
[Guest]: from siachen that has been well recorded that the then army chief went into the meeting and said no
[Guest]: that cannot be uh we cannot move away from siachen at the last moment which did not allow a deal to
[Guest]: take place with pakistan i'm not saying whether it was right or wrong but the fact is that the
[Guest]: military leadership did have a say in doing it after creating a narrative or the fact that a
[Guest]: new china strike co was created after a lot of articles came out in the indian media between
[Guest]: 2011 and 2014 saying that india needs a new strike coach and to take on the chinese threat of course
[Guest]: that strike code has never come through because it's such a financially taxing option that no
[Guest]: government can afford to have it so it has not been fully raised so far it remains only partially
[Guest]: real but the point i'm trying to make is that the political leadership and the military leaderships
[Guest]: interact not only directly between the leaders but also through the public in which media starts
[Guest]: playing an important role and through that a lot of actions a lot of decisions which are taken are
[Guest]: influenced or happen in that context are situated in that context in that in some way so i'm just
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud here that would it then mean that if there is growing nationalism happening in the
[Amit Varma]: country and obviously the armed forces are sort of tied in with that nationalism and you're proud
[Amit Varma]: of the soldier and how can you protest about x y or z when your soldiers are dying at the border
[Amit Varma]: all that rhetoric is there does it then become natural for the armed forces to be drawn towards
[Amit Varma]: politics like at one point you've written about how during watch buys time general vp malik
[Amit Varma]: complained to him that you know the images of the three service chiefs were being used in bjp
[Amit Varma]: advertising and he was like what you know what is this you can't do this and yet just a few years
[Amit Varma]: later you know you have bipin rawat after balakot playing along with the macho political rhetoric
[Amit Varma]: of we taught them a lesson and so on and so forth rather than keeping a distance and and obviously
[Amit Varma]: there is now the precedent of you know former general actually joining the cabinet and so on
[Amit Varma]: which in terms of incentives just creates completely the wrong incentives because now
[Amit Varma]: you can you know play up your time in uniform and turn it into political capital and all of that so
[Amit Varma]: and somehow over the decades it seems to me you know like whatever overtures career kariyappa
[Amit Varma]: might have made towards running in politics after he retired before he retired he was non-political
[Amit Varma]: in fact after independence i believe he sent a letter out to his forces saying that whatever
[Amit Varma]: happens we shall not have anything to do with politics and it's after politics that he went
[Amit Varma]: in that other direction that number one is there a fear that that wall is falling number two should
[Amit Varma]: there be a line that one draws who defines a line why is the line defined that way and what
[Amit Varma]: institutions and what rules of the game can keep that distance if a distance needs to be kept
[Guest]: so the distance between the civilian and the military is healthy because as you said military
[Guest]: leadership comes with a certain halo and a certain order of sacrifice which is hard for the any
[Guest]: civilian leadership to match any civilian opponent and that is why you know you can't have a former
[Guest]: military officer in the united states without a special sanction being given the post of the
[Guest]: defense secretary in the u.s and when general austin lloyd austin actually gets the post he
[Guest]: cannot use the rank general so he's secretary austin not general austin you know this is
[Guest]: completely different from how because so you know you can't showcase that you're a former military
[Guest]: officer you are here as a civilian completely only and only in your capacity as a civilian
[Guest]: so he cannot actually use the rank and when biden unknowingly or inadvertently used his rank a couple
[Guest]: of days back last week i think there was an article in washington post which clearly pointed
[Guest]: out that biden should not have you know done that it's a grave error on his part to call him
[Guest]: general austin and not secretary austin i think that's the fundamental dividing line between the
[Guest]: military and the civilian political leadership can you draw a hard and fast rule can you erect
[Guest]: a chinese wall between the two i think that's very hard to do in a democrat in a in a democracy
[Guest]: because you cannot say that somebody who's just served in uniform cannot fight an election
[Guest]: there have been whole this debate about whether people who have served in very senior posts in
[Guest]: the government they should have a five-year cooling off period before they can enter politics
[Guest]: i don't know how viable it is and how practical it is but this as with most other things in a
[Guest]: liberal democracy there it has to be about norms what are the kinds of norms that are being followed
[Guest]: by people who are in those positions of influence and power no everything cannot be legislated
[Guest]: everything cannot be you know told tightened by rules what is the kind of values what is the kind
[Guest]: of norms that people follow and i think that is what would determine the course of the cemetery
[Guest]: relations in india and where it goes whether the military gets even more closely aligned with the
[Guest]: political leadership and there are two parts to it you know without taking any names the fact that
[Guest]: military is being paraded more and more in support of a certain political ideology and a certain
[Guest]: political leadership is of course worrisome but the fact that the military leadership is being
[Guest]: chosen by overlooking seniority for no very strong reason become creates an incentive for a lot of
[Guest]: senior leadership to show that they are politically aligned it's a very natural thing to do if i know
[Guest]: that anybody can be picked up and if i'm one of the five or six guys i would like to be seen in
[Guest]: good light by the political powers that be so that i am picked up so while seniority on paper
[Guest]: seems like a very bad idea in practice especially as it had been practiced unless there's a reason
[Guest]: why it needs to be breached very strong reason why it needs to be breached handpicking people
[Guest]: for various posts by overlooking seniority especially in the military has a certain
[Guest]: disadvantage in a politically volatile politically not stable country society like
[Guest]: i don't mean to say stable in that sense what i mean to say is politically not mature enough
[Guest]: society like india where institutions do not perform their role to the extent that they should
[Amit Varma]: perform them no but just to respond to one of the sort of things that you said earlier which was
[Amit Varma]: about how there are things which you can't legislate for everything that certain things
[Amit Varma]: come from values which have become part of the convention and all of that and i have to admit
[Amit Varma]: i'm a little skeptical of that because to me all values ultimately derive from incentives not in a
[Amit Varma]: direct sense but incentives change behavior and then behavior over a period of time becomes embedded
[Amit Varma]: in a culture and values change accordingly so i do think that's a bit of an issue but moving on
[Amit Varma]: from there like if we speak of if we leave aside the sonny question of the politicization and so on
[Amit Varma]: what is the state of our army today like one hears a different analyst saying that look our
[Amit Varma]: conventional army is in really bad shape if we had a conventional war with pakistan though of course
[Amit Varma]: we won't and we can go into those reasons but if we had a conventional war with pakistan we would
[Amit Varma]: probably we might even lose and you know you've written in the past about how there is a budgetary
[Amit Varma]: crisis within the army you wrote a 2018 piece which i'll link from the show notes where you
[Amit Varma]: spoke of you know the army vice chief talking to group of mps and what he said and i'll quote from
[Amit Varma]: your piece quote the army vice chief told the mps that 68 percent of the army's equipment is vintage
[Amit Varma]: and the capital budget doesn't even cater for the committed payments of 125 ongoing procurement
[Amit Varma]: deals leave alone provide funds to replace the vintage equipment there is no budget for making
[Amit Varma]: emergency procurements or for providing perimeter security to army camps susceptible to terrorist
[Amit Varma]: attacks the powers to buy ammunition and spares for critical stalking levels needed for 10 days
[Amit Varma]: of war fighting have been delegated to the defense services but not enough funds have been allocated
[Amit Varma]: for it on top of that the army will be saddled with an additional bill of rupees 5000 crore
[Amit Varma]: due to increased taxes because of gst but no additional money has been made available for it
[Amit Varma]: besides paying salaries there is little else that the army will be able to do with the money given
[Amit Varma]: by the government stop quote and as you go on to point out in your piece it's the same with the
[Amit Varma]: navy and the air force and so on so what kind of is the situation do we have the kind of modernized
[Amit Varma]: army that we need is is this sort of a precarious situation you know i would not i would not agree
[Guest]: with the contention that uh that india is going to lose to pakistan in a in a conventional war
[Guest]: no i don't think that's true i don't i and i don't know if any analyst who has any indian
[Amit Varma]: analyst who has actually said that uh what i think people say something like this for rhetorical
[Guest]: purposes so i you know i think the argument is that we do not have the kind of military superiority
[Guest]: but that we would need to have for an outright victory over pakistan so it's not that india
[Guest]: would lose to pakistan in a conventional conflict that's that clearly is not a possibility but the
[Guest]: fact that india would not have the kind of conventional superiority that pakistan would
[Guest]: sign us you know another dhaka kind of agreement in in december 1971 kind of a moment you know
[Guest]: that looks unlikely we don't have the kind of military superiority when it comes to china
[Guest]: of course it's a totally different ball game it's just not the idea of conventional superiority in
[Guest]: terms of number of tanks or number of soldiers number of aircraft submarines ships or whatever
[Guest]: you have it's also about the new technology that the chinese army the pla has really mastered and
[Guest]: brought to the fore so the pla actually marks itself against the u.s army and it is looking
[Guest]: at ai it is looking at robotics it is looking at you know unarmed drones it's a totally different
[Guest]: kind of warfare that they are fighting it's a new generation of warfare that they are fighting
[Guest]: and the americans have been acknowledging it the fact that the chinese are benchmarking themselves
[Guest]: against the u.s in cyber in ai in robotics in in all these other things all these modern things
[Guest]: that they are facing so india has a double crisis when it comes to china it does not have the kind
[Guest]: of technological advancements that the chinese army is pursuing it even does not have the old
[Guest]: world conventional superiority or the conventional power superiority is a wrong word a conventional
[Guest]: military power that it had earlier to be able to ward off or hold the chinese now when you combine
[Guest]: the two together if you have a collusive threat from china and pakistan then the situation
[Guest]: really really becomes tough so i'll give you simply two two things you know the the raksha
[Guest]: mantri's directive or the defense minister's directive the last one to the best of my
[Guest]: understanding came out in 2009 asked the armed forces to be prepared for to have their stocks
[Guest]: and ammunition in stores for 30 days of intense war fighting and 30 days of normal war fighting
[Guest]: so the rate of ammunition expenditure in intense is three times the rate of normal rate of expenditure
[Guest]: and these are old tables through which it has been generated so essentially you need to be prepared
[Guest]: to fight on two fronts for 40 days of intense war fighting now the army does not have the ammunition
[Guest]: for even 10 days of war fighting essentially for 10 days of war fighting they started building up
[Guest]: in mr parika's time as defense minister for 10 days of war fighting so if the directive is for
[Guest]: 40 days of war fight which the defense minister of the country speaking on behalf of the cabinet
[Guest]: has signed which has not been amended till date you want the armed forces to be prepared for that
[Guest]: the money has not been provided for that it's as simple as that the fact that the that the air force
[Guest]: is supposed to have 42 squadrons of of fighter aircraft and which are down to 30 which includes
[Guest]: you know the mig-21 which still includes the tejas and the mig-21 and other aircraft it's not that
[Guest]: everything is a sokoi and everything is a rafale and there are mirage 2000s there are mig-29s
[Guest]: you know all refurbished and uh and modernized but still older generation aircraft that are there so
[Guest]: these are severe shortcomings which have not been made up by the government by providing the kind
[Guest]: of resources that the armed forces need the point is that the armed forces have been told that you
[Guest]: should be prepared to deal with both the fronts simultaneously so armed forces have to prepare
[Guest]: for it now how do you prepare it first you know you prepare yourself by training you prepare
[Guest]: for leadership by doctrine and by equipping yourself by resourcing yourself for it the
[Guest]: resources have not been made available to the armed forces to essentially equip themselves
[Guest]: or to prepare themselves so they can talk about all the training they can talk about all the
[Guest]: doctrine they can talk about dissuasion and you know they can talk about all the kind of language
[Guest]: linguistics but the fact of the matter is that the wherewithal does not exist to fight on both
[Guest]: the fronts and the whole idea is somehow it will magically happen that we will not fight on both
[Guest]: fronts probably the political leadership is convinced that we will not fight on both fronts
[Guest]: or maybe even not on even one front maybe somehow diplomatically we will be able to resolve the
[Guest]: situation with china which so that we don't have to go to a war with china and to presume that the
[Guest]: chinese do not understand it or the pakistanis do not understand it i think is a mistake and going
[Guest]: into the future as the power difference between india and china increases and as pakistan becomes
[Guest]: a subset of the chinese problem for india the collusive threat problem could really become big
[Guest]: let me explain to you in a different way amit you know let's say in the 65 or 1965 conflict what
[Guest]: happens the pakistanis come into kashmir lal bahadur shastri decides to open up the punjab
[Guest]: and the rajasthan front you know you he says i'm opening up opening up the whole of ib whereas
[Guest]: the ayub and bhutto thought that they would only be the war would be limited to kashmir
[Guest]: we have already sent our you know infiltrators etc and then we will do and we will we will take
[Guest]: away kashmir etc they get surprised when shastri decides to expand the war to the international
[Guest]: border now what happens in a two-front war the most likely two-front war scenario let me paint
[Guest]: it from ladakh for example the chinese come to wherever ladakh or wherever they come in
[Guest]: the army moves in it has to move some of its resources which are dedicated for the pakistan
[Guest]: border to deal with the chinese threat including moving of your arms ammunition resources etc
[Guest]: the pakistanis decided to take some part of kashmir whatever part of kashmir they decide to
[Guest]: on foreign military grounds and i'm not even talking about siachen which is a different
[Guest]: ball game all together based on depth song that's a different story all together they try to take
[Guest]: on some part of kashmir what would india have done in normal course india would have gone done what
[Guest]: shastri did if it was a single front war if pakistan tried to come and occupy kashmir a part
[Guest]: of kashmir india would go and open other fronts and conventionally try to fight in rajasthan
[Guest]: punjab and and threaten and put pressure on on pakistan now if india is also engaged on china
[Guest]: front at the same time there is no possibility of going down and opening punjab or rajasthan
[Guest]: or going anywhere down you would only want to restrict it and somehow fight a very defensive
[Guest]: battle in kashmir that is the kind of military challenge strategic challenge that is being posed
[Guest]: to india by the two front collusive threat which most people do not seem to realize or seem to
[Guest]: appreciate i think the military appreciate to to some extent but the fact they are constrained by
[Guest]: the lack of resources which have been provided to them by the government which makes the situation
[Guest]: very tricky for them they you know no military leader can go and say no army chief or air chief
[Guest]: worth his salt can go and say oh i cannot fight a two-front war or we are not capable of fighting a
[Guest]: two-front war you know the government will say please resign and go home why are you here if you
[Guest]: cannot fight a two-front war so all this lip service is paid all the rhetoric is said about
[Guest]: the no we will fight a two-front war we'll find a way there's a there's a method we'll make a
[Guest]: primary front we'll make a secondary front but the fundamental fact is that the resources are
[Guest]: simply not there to fight on two fronts the resources are simply not there to even fight
[Guest]: on the chinese front alone and if it is a two-front thing then you are going to be under real pressure
[Guest]: from pakistan as well and i think that should worry most indians whether you look at pakistan
[Guest]: and china as separate fronts or whether you look at pakistan as a subset of the chinese threat or
[Amit Varma]: as a subset of the chinese uh chinese front in that case so i'll i'll ask you about india china
[Amit Varma]: india pakistan in much more detail after this but before that to kind of drill down a little bit
[Amit Varma]: more in this question like what this is fundamentally is that there is a problem of
[Amit Varma]: resources now even if there is also a sort of an intellectual obfuscation or a denial that this is
[Amit Varma]: a problem at all to different extents i mean different extents of that denial within the
[Amit Varma]: different establishments assume that everyone was on the same page and we all agreed that this is a
[Amit Varma]: problem and that therefore this is a problem of resources my next question is looking at the state
[Amit Varma]: of the economy and the way our state is set up it's a two-part question number one is this problem
[Amit Varma]: solvable in an ideal world and number two is this problem solvable in the actual world as it is now
[Guest]: with a political economy being the way it is uh in an ideal world the problem is solvable we need
[Amit Varma]: to grow at 20 percent per annum and maybe and we can solve it we can yeah in an ideal ideal world
[Amit Varma]: i mean everyone's will is aligned in the same direction but your resources are what they are
[Guest]: no if the resources are what they are so just to give you a simple example that the total capital
[Guest]: expenditure of the government of india and i'm talking about the government of india not the
[Guest]: state government but the government of india's total capital expenditure one third of it you
[Guest]: know 32 31 33 let's call it one third of it over the last five years on an average one third of it
[Guest]: goes towards the defense capital expenditure now there's no way you can increase that without
[Guest]: stopping everything else you would not be making any infrastructure in this country no bridges no
[Guest]: roads no highways no expressways no major hospitals no major infrastructure would be coming up in
[Guest]: this you know because where would the you want more resources for capital procurement and the
[Guest]: more resources means that where will the if the resources are not increasing the pie is not
[Guest]: increasing if the cake is not increasing then the then the share will come from other infrastructure
[Guest]: other capital expenditure and that is just not possible so even in an ideal world if everybody's
[Guest]: aligned together the simple fact that the cake is not big enough for everybody to share especially
[Guest]: in a country like ours where development is the is the need of the hour it would be very it's not
[Guest]: just not possible to balance the equation the two sides of the equation cannot be balanced in that
[Guest]: manner it is just not possible to balance that equation and i think that is what fundamentally
[Guest]: we are stuck at therefore the only answer as everybody says is economic growth the only answer
[Guest]: to india's national security would be very high levels of economic growth over a sustained period
[Guest]: of time that would allow you to spend more on national security more on defense and build up
[Guest]: those resources it cannot be done by any by waving a magic wand at all and certainly not at the level
[Guest]: of economic growth that we have witnessed since the demonetization in 2016 it has been very very
[Guest]: tough you quoted the 2018 army vice chief's statements to the parliamentary standing
[Guest]: committee the funniest part is that that same gentleman very quickly joined the bjp a few months
[Guest]: later so i know that's something which really you know boggles my mind i was like okay you know so
[Guest]: so this is it i don't know what i don't i don't even know how to interpret this thing then or what
[Amit Varma]: to make of it it's like a good mutual friend nathan pie often says that the best foreign policy is
[Amit Varma]: economic growth and that's of course for multiple reasons one reason is you have a larger pie and
[Amit Varma]: you can spend more on your defense but another reason is you change the incentives for everyone
[Amit Varma]: else if you are big enough you know someone like china would rather trade with us and try to make
[Amit Varma]: random villages in arunachal pradesh like what is even the point of that you know one of the
[Amit Varma]: interesting things you said while you were speaking about the way that politicians kind of
[Amit Varma]: think of the army is that you pointed out that they actually think that there will be no war
[Amit Varma]: at all that we have to have an army we'll sort it out by other efforts and it seems to me also
[Amit Varma]: that there is a kind of thinking which would go that now that we are a nuclear power now that
[Amit Varma]: there is that nuclear deterrent in place the actual conventional army while it needs to exist
[Amit Varma]: in practical terms could be a bit of an artifact because you're never having a conventional war
[Amit Varma]: there is a threshold you will never cross because the danger of going nuclear is simply too high
[Amit Varma]: in a sense both india and pakistan going nuclear has actually taken away our advantage like whatever
[Amit Varma]: advantage we had in conventional terms is now equalized because in a game theory sense you
[Amit Varma]: are never going to go beyond a certain threshold you will have you know the optics of balakot and
[Amit Varma]: surgical strikes and all of that to satisfy the local political constituency and we we'll discuss
[Amit Varma]: that later as well but then the question is that how is the army to think of itself like on the
[Amit Varma]: one hand you pointed out about how the chinese army is modernizing with ai and robotics and all
[Amit Varma]: that i am guessing that there must be many aspects of the indian armed forces which are actually
[Amit Varma]: redundant in terms of technology how are we to think of that and how is the army to think of
[Amit Varma]: itself when the army needs to exist to be sort of a pawn in the geopolitical games but is never
[Amit Varma]: actually going to be used that seems to be a certain kind of school of thought that is out
[Guest]: there so what's your response yeah so there are two ways i look at it so i'll expand it to more
[Guest]: than the army the armed forces so the armed forces will have a role to play the navy perhaps in the
[Guest]: in the indian ocean region because it's such a important region trade wise if you dominate the
[Guest]: indian ocean region you control a lot of this thing and you can put pressure on various countries
[Guest]: including china you can wave the indian flag a clearly a blue water navy would be a great idea
[Guest]: and that's what navy has been advocating for itself for the last two decades if not more at
[Guest]: least 2025 years that they've been advocating that we want to be a really a blue water navy
[Guest]: a three carrier navy to be able to take our take the indian flag far and far and wide and really
[Guest]: be controlling the indian ocean in the sense what the the inverse of what china says china says
[Guest]: indian ocean is not india's ocean when india says you know i want to make indian ocean india's ocean
[Guest]: in that sense for the army particularly the whole idea is that how do we find a way in which we can
[Guest]: impose the nation's will on an adversary under the nuclear threshold so the whole idea the whole
[Guest]: strategy the whole thing is can i do something by moving in quickly what was called the cold start
[Guest]: later on called the proactive operations poa whatever the name you may want to give to it
[Guest]: the whole idea is can i move in quickly grab a certain piece of territory or a certain piece
[Guest]: of valuable territory with or break the adversary center of gravity so to speak so and do it rather
[Guest]: quickly and under the nuclear threshold so that it comes to the negotiating table or concedes or
[Guest]: listens or whatever you wanted to get it done or even humiliate it or even threaten it that's the
[Guest]: way the armed forces have responded to the changing our dynamics of having the nuclear weapons amit
[Guest]: let's also understand that nuclear weapons at the end of the day are political weapons the indian
[Guest]: armed forces do not control the nuclear nuclear weapons are controlled politically and whatever
[Guest]: would happen would happen as a decision as a political decision not as a military decision
[Guest]: in pakistan gulam isaac khan handed over the nuclear weapons to the military even in pakistan
[Guest]: they were not controlled by the military and now they are they become military weapons especially
[Guest]: they are brought in these short-range tactical nuclear weapons and they brought in these small
[Guest]: missiles they are almost you know using them at the lowest in the army for to threaten india that
[Guest]: that go nuclear which is not the case in india so when the military operates or when the military
[Guest]: plans for its operations it really does not factor in nuclear weapons at the in the first instance
[Guest]: and there's a very high bar for use of nuclear weapons since hiroshima and nagasaki you know
[Guest]: we saw that during the korean war and since then there's a very very high bar for use of nuclear
[Guest]: weapons it would really take something for even pakistan or india to even threaten the use of
[Guest]: nuclear weapons or to use them so even you gave the example of balakur the fact that indians
[Guest]: went and attempted an airstrike did an airstrike inside pakistan proper uh the fact that pakistan
[Guest]: that then the indians threatened a missile strike pakistanis threatened a missile strike
[Guest]: and prime minister modi went and said in election speech that we haven't kept them for for diwali
[Guest]: but the fact is that nuclear weapons still remain a distant thing in the india pakistan calculus
[Guest]: what that red line is we really don't know well i don't know what pakistan's red line is we can all
[Guest]: keep on assessing that red line and i always believe it's a it's a dynamic red line what
[Guest]: india's red line whether we china is if there's a red line what is it and that probably keeps on
[Guest]: varying depending on time and place i think uh while the nuclear weapons have affected the way
[Guest]: wars are fought kargil happened after the nuclear weapons had come into play india mobilized in
[Guest]: parakram after nuclear weapons and based on after parakram india decided to undertake a new thinking
[Guest]: on cold start operations proactive operations etc and i think that's how the thinking is going on
[Guest]: currently within the armed forces with the way they are they are trying to operate in this
[Amit Varma]: environment so tell me about parakram because you actually served there you were actually
[Amit Varma]: as you mentioned you know at the border and all of that waiting to take the indian flag to lahore
[Amit Varma]: and just kind of planted there you know how much of it was theater how much of it was actually
[Amit Varma]: preparing for war should it happen like at that moment in time what did you think the probabilities
[Amit Varma]: were what did you find more desirable and even there of course probabilistic thinking comes
[Amit Varma]: into play how far would we need to be pushed before we actually went to war for example which
[Amit Varma]: is a separate question and i can ask you right with your current hat on so tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about that and then also how the dynamic of india pakistan relationships have been playing out since
[Amit Varma]: because like you pointed out you know 9 11 kind of changed a lot there i remember traveling through
[Amit Varma]: pakistan to cover a cricket tour in 2006 but i was also writing pieces for the wall street journal
[Amit Varma]: and one economist i met there said that listen we don't call al-qaeda al-qaeda we call it al-faida
[Amit Varma]: because of all the money that flooded into pakistan after that happened and obviously
[Amit Varma]: then they would because pakistan was helping them with the so-called war on terror they would
[Amit Varma]: you know the us would turn a blind eye to what was happening in india and and all of that so
[Amit Varma]: there's that interesting dynamic playing out how has that relationship kind of evolved over the
[Amit Varma]: last 20 years or so under of course a nuclear shadow but even apart from that just the politics
[Guest]: of both countries so in prakram i was a very young officer so really not really understanding
[Guest]: the larger dynamics of how probably the decisions were being taken but i can say that as a separate
[Guest]: officer mines were laid by india on which is like the first preparatory stage before you go to war
[Guest]: and actual live mines were laid a lot of casualties took place in bilingual mind there were accidents
[Guest]: which are par for the course etc those things happened but there was serious preparation at
[Guest]: that point in time and at one point in time it almost seemed that india had decided to go into
[Guest]: pakistan and and launch a war clearly there was a lot of international pressure which came from
[Guest]: the us primarily and from others and which stopped eventually stopped india and then there was a
[Guest]: whole theory then there's a lot of lot of lot has been written about it whether india genuinely
[Guest]: wanted to go to war and only wanted to convey to the west that we are serious and therefore
[Guest]: took all those steps because how do you credibly convey that they are serious and which brought
[Guest]: Musharraf to make those announcements on the Lashkar-e-Toiba and the Jaish-e-Mohammad which
[Guest]: he made on live television and then the Indian army pulled back from the borders there were a
[Guest]: couple of things which happened very clearly that the mobilization timings the timing for the forces
[Guest]: to mobilize from their permanent locations to the to the forward lines those timings were just not
[Guest]: kept up by the army and there's something which came out in all these study reports after the war
[Guest]: they took a lot of time to really reach those forward lines you know so if something was
[Guest]: planned to reach in 10 days they took 30 days 35 days 40 days to reach so that completely upset all
[Guest]: the planning that had gone on till then and clearly showed that some of the planning was unrealistic
[Guest]: that is what led to the whole idea of cold start operations can you move certain forward and because
[Guest]: the window is very short before the western countries western powers intervene can you
[Guest]: use that window to quickly go in rather than having this massive second world war kind of
[Guest]: mobilization where it takes months for you to reach the border and then decide to go to war
[Guest]: and by the time western leaderships and western diplomats have come in and put pressure on you so
[Guest]: as not to go that was the one big change which took place after Parakram but that has not been
[Guest]: tested so far and has not been checked by or tested on the ground by the by India since but
[Guest]: a lot of talk a lot of discussion a lot of practice a lot of rehearsals have taken place on that what
[Guest]: is the dynamics between India and Pakistan when it comes to proactive operations cold start Pakistan
[Guest]: has milked the whole idea that India will launch cold start operations will do proactive operations
[Guest]: to the maximum it has of course prepared for it under Kayani they conducted multiple exercises
[Guest]: where they practiced and rehearsed their responses to it and they claim that they are better prepared
[Guest]: for it and they also claim that they brought the tactical nuclear weapons the Hath missiles to
[Guest]: deal with this kind of challenge because the Indian army would move in very very quickly and
[Guest]: occupy certain territory and the only way for them to stop it was to fire certain tactical nuclear
[Guest]: weapons which are like low output nuclear weapons so that is the kind of dynamics that has taken
[Guest]: place because of Parakram and what happened after the attack on Indian parliament but that's that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of fascinating and and you know the other part of the question that I asked was that assume
[Amit Varma]: that you are in charge of sort of a decision making what is the threshold at which you say
[Amit Varma]: that okay we have to move in now we have to actually go to war or is there no threshold
[Amit Varma]: because the nuclear option is just too expensive and if there is no threshold if you are never
[Amit Varma]: actually going to war if you're just going to posture then the other side surely knows that
[Amit Varma]: and can take advantage of that right so you know how does that sort of it's almost a game
[Amit Varma]: theoretic situation except that it's not actually chicken chicken because both sides know the other
[Amit Varma]: one won't be crazy enough but who's going to stop first yeah so it is clearly a game theory
[Guest]: does apply there and that's what will decide how the call is taken what is it that you want the
[Guest]: adversary to do and if it concedes then you don't do it then your threat is clearly credible how
[Guest]: credible is your threat is the question and to have a credible threat you need to have the armed
[Guest]: forces what will be the reasons for which India would go to war my sense is a very big terror
[Guest]: attack on Indian soil which can be seen to have come from Pakistan and where Pakistan is unwilling
[Guest]: to punish those terrorist leaders or hand them over to India and then that would lead to a kind
[Guest]: of retaliation on Pakistan and the other situation is that there is too much of political instability
[Guest]: in Pakistan and a mad Pakistani leader tries to capture Kashmir regain Kashmir for whatever reason
[Guest]: something you know a leader military leader which is far ahead of Musharraf in that sense
[Guest]: and tries to recapture Kashmir and tries to try some funny things that would of course India would
[Guest]: clearly open up a conventional military option conventional military war at that point I think
[Guest]: those are the two scenarios where I think India would go in for a conventional war and whether
[Guest]: this would lead to the nuclear option being exercised or nuclear option coming into play
[Guest]: is something which every single analyst has debated and written about and spoken about
[Guest]: and I don't think anybody has an answer but I think everybody will agree that there is an
[Guest]: inherent risk involved in the escalation ladder so if you think that you are the one controlling
[Guest]: the escalation ladder there are two sides playing the game and you know there are a
[Guest]: lot of miscommunication and misapprehensions happening at the same time and it can clearly
[Guest]: lead to situations where the escalation ladder may not be controlled by you and I think that's
[Guest]: something which everybody worries about that is something which nobody knows how it will play out
[Guest]: and I think that's something which which is what stops prevents makes people think twice before
[Amit Varma]: committing to opening a front opening a conventional war going for a conventional war
[Amit Varma]: no and it also strikes me that it is easy for us to get complacent and say that listen you know no
[Amit Varma]: nuclear weapons since hiroshima nagasaki so it's not going to happen and imagine that the situation
[Amit Varma]: will last forever and i'm reminded of this beautiful book i'm reading right now by a german
[Amit Varma]: writer called stefan schweig who led nazi germany and killed himself in 42 but just before that he
[Amit Varma]: published this book called the world of yesterday where he's talking about the pre-world war one
[Amit Varma]: years and he's essentially saying that we were under this liberal illusion that all our problems
[Amit Varma]: are solved that you know a liberal vision of the world has won over there will be no more terrible
[Amit Varma]: wars you know all these other problems like hunger famine etc will gradually solve and nothing will
[Amit Varma]: happen and little did we know and and he's talking about this pre-world war thing where there is
[Amit Varma]: almost like a fukuyama-esque end of history kind of sense to it that we've sorted everything it's
[Amit Varma]: done and then suddenly everything goes nuts and when we talk of nuclear weapons i also think that
[Amit Varma]: at some level it's kind of dangerous to think that nothing will ever happen this is all just
[Amit Varma]: it's a political tool because you know of course nothing will happen until something does
[Amit Varma]: and you know there's no reason to kind of assume complacency the other sort of difficult angle in
[Amit Varma]: this is that this is not just two states it's not just the state of india and the state of pakistan
[Amit Varma]: which determines what happens within india and pakistan like you've pointed out in this recent
[Amit Varma]: piece you wrote on foreign policy quote talks can be derailed as much by a lone suicide bomber in
[Amit Varma]: kashmir as by the powerful deep state in pakistan or by the stranded anti-pakistan hindu majoritarian
[Amit Varma]: electoral agent of indian prime minister narendra modi stop quote the idea being that they can be
[Amit Varma]: some lone rogue actor who can set something off and then there is of course a fog of war where
[Amit Varma]: you don't know that what happened is this really the state of pakistan doing this are these rogue
[Amit Varma]: actors within the deep state is it a lone suicide bomber possibly even a local guy in kashmir who's
[Amit Varma]: doing all of this all of that uncertainty is also kind of built in so that complicates the
[Guest]: whole situation so much more doesn't it yeah definitely i mean just going back to fukuyama
[Guest]: you know the loveliest part of fukuyama's story is that his initial essay actually had a question
[Amit Varma]: mark at the end of his title yeah it's a misunderstood essay he gets a lot of flack
[Guest]: for it so you know the question mark completely changes everything as you know you know so that's
[Guest]: so you know just that was an aside on the other statement that you made about the nuclear weapons
[Guest]: you know give it there will never be a nuclear war no i don't think anybody should ever say that
[Guest]: there will never be a nuclear war that would be complete the only question where i was what i was
[Guest]: responding to was your premise that nuclear weapons have made the the indian armed forces
[Guest]: redundant in a sense what i was saying is no there is they are not redundant they continue to exist
[Amit Varma]: despite the nuclear weapons it was a you missed my question mark it was a question more than a
[Guest]: premise yeah fair enough just to clarify because people may not be should not misunderstand it the
[Guest]: whole idea is that despite the nuclear weapons the conventional military the conventional armed
[Guest]: forces have a role to play which they have tried to reorient themselves for train themselves device
[Guest]: for themselves it doesn't mean that the nuclear weapons cannot cannot be used or will not be used
[Guest]: or there is some kind of that they are kept only as a showpiece which will never be used as far as
[Guest]: the india pakistan relations are concerned there are many factors but i mean if india pakistan
[Guest]: relations are to be considered the simple and the most fundamental factor is that there is a certain
[Guest]: narrative on both the sides there's a narrative on the indian side and there's a narrative on
[Guest]: the pakistani side that narrative is embedded in history in politics and religion in colonialism
[Guest]: in every geopolitics in every single framework that the modern political socio-political world
[Guest]: has it is embedded in every single thing in geography in history everything whatever we can
[Guest]: think of that narrative is the fundamental structural factor where we believe that
[Guest]: kashmir belongs to us and the pakistanis have occupied a certain part of kashmir including
[Guest]: related pakistan which should come to us logically and we are going to take it at any cost whereas
[Guest]: the pakistani side believes that kashmir has been grabbed by indians muslim majority state has to
[Guest]: be part of that fundamental dissonance that fundamental gap has not been preached it is
[Guest]: the structural factor unless we fix that narrative gap how are we going to fix the problem i don't
[Guest]: see any kind of quick fixes where you can deal with it eventually as you see today when we are
[Guest]: recording the show imran has sent a letter to modi responding to modi's letter of on 23rd march on
[Guest]: pakistan day and imran has again said that the core issue is jammu and kashmir because prime
[Guest]: minister modi had said that the core issue is uh terror that you know you please stop coming from
[Guest]: our side so fundamentally you know we are operating in a in within a structure where there are
[Guest]: structurally it is not possible to align it these are two parallel tracks which will keep on going
[Guest]: parallelly you know i'll keep on talking about terror they will keep on talking about kashmir
[Guest]: unless the narrative is fixed you cannot align those two and everything else that uh you know
[Guest]: that can lead to this whole process going kaput actually flows from that whether it is a terror
[Guest]: alone terror attack like what happened in pulwama you know a 20 22 year old guy with a suicide
[Guest]: with a car and a 20 kgs of explosive in his car banging into a CRPF bus or it is somebody else
[Guest]: doing something similar or some elements of pakistan army uh who believe or deep state who
[Guest]: believe that pakistan is conceding too much trying to you know try and do some stunts on from their
[Guest]: side which has happened earlier as well from the pakistani side and of course there's a danger as
[Guest]: you said mr modi's whole politics majoritarian uh hindu politics anti-pakistan narrative which
[Guest]: he has used in various state assembly polls whether it is gujarat whether it is karnataka
[Guest]: whether it is uttar pradesh pakistan has been a constant factor which has been in book how does
[Guest]: he sell peace with pakistan when since 2002 you know you remember the mia musharraf campaign at
[Guest]: that time he has always used pakistan as an enemy and trying to show himself as somebody who's trying
[Guest]: to who has dealt with pakistan very efficiently and very effectively and very boldly so i do not
[Guest]: know how this narrative how this problem of narrative in the on the indian side and on the
[Guest]: pakistani side can be bridged which when merged with all these other problems of lone wolf lone
[Guest]: terrorist with pakistani rogue state with indian dominant hindu majoritarian political ideology in
[Guest]: india how do you fix this i i really don't know that there's so anybody who believes that this
[Guest]: process is permanent irreversible and will lead to a solution of the problem needs to get a recheck
[Guest]: i am not convinced that this solution is that easy and can be found so quickly the closest we
[Guest]: came to solution is the time when you were in pakistan you know covering the cricket series
[Guest]: that is the time we came with the four point formula etc and then the whole process got
[Guest]: derailed on the pakistani side because musharraf got involved with that whole lawyer's crisis and
[Guest]: then completely everything then stopped and then since then we have never been able to that's the
[Guest]: closest we have come to this thing i have spoken to some senior indian diplomats who have dealt
[Guest]: with pakistan over the years and they say that pakistan always overreaches either out of a
[Guest]: certain defensiveness or out of certain aggressiveness whether it is bhutto talking
[Guest]: to swaran singh uh after the 62 war uh you know trying to be very aggressive about uh about what
[Guest]: pakistan wanted or you know bhutto in shimla after the 1971 war where he's trying to say oh
[Guest]: please save me i'll be hanged if i concede you too much kind of a thing they have always overreached
[Guest]: in a sense and that overreach has not allowed any solution to to come through of course the
[Guest]: practical answer as most people would tell you sane people would tell you is that why don't
[Guest]: you make the line of control the actual border and that is something which has been discussed
[Guest]: since tashkent you know people who were at tashkent have said that this was discussed at
[Guest]: tashkent as well and this was agreed almost informally between the two sides between ayub
[Guest]: and shastri that we should make the line of control the international border at some point in
[Guest]: time but i don't think now with the kind of narrative that we have and the kind of ideology
[Guest]: that we have ruling on our side which believes in the whole idea of an akhand bharat which does
[Guest]: not believe that partition was the right thing it would be very difficult for them for anyone to go
[Guest]: and say okay that we are giving away pakistan occupied kashmir to pakistan or gilgit baltistan
[Guest]: to pakistan and still take a very strident anti-pakistan line electorally in their election
[Amit Varma]: campaigns here in india no and uh sort of three thoughts strike me while uh you know you were
[Amit Varma]: talking just now and one of them is i agree that it seems and it's almost like israel palestine
[Amit Varma]: issue that it doesn't seem to be a resolution because the narratives are just so opposed
[Amit Varma]: having said that i think that the kashmir situation is one that could have resolved
[Amit Varma]: itself through decades if we had only taken the effort to integrate kashmiris within our economy
[Amit Varma]: in fact around that time that i was in pakistan around that time that you know musharraf and
[Amit Varma]: vajpayee were talking about chilling out david devdas writes about how the youth of kashmir
[Amit Varma]: at that time became aspirational they wanted to do mbas they wanted jobs they wanted all of that
[Amit Varma]: but things just fell backwards from there and if things had gone in a different direction
[Amit Varma]: and they could have felt that there is value in it for being part of this indian union maybe
[Amit Varma]: things could have been different but that's an aside and amusing and anyway it is moot because
[Amit Varma]: it is too late for that very sadly the other interesting part about narratives is one of
[Amit Varma]: course there are the narratives about kashmir but then there is also this local sort of political
[Amit Varma]: narrative this nationalistic narrative where pakistan is always the enemy where you keep
[Amit Varma]: telling your enemies that you are anti-national go to pakistan you know it's become part of the
[Amit Varma]: vocabulary in that sense so how do you see that danger of the narrative itself making reality go
[Amit Varma]: in a certain direction like you know if the prime minister is in a political fix and you have no
[Amit Varma]: option but to raise the kind of temperature like in fact what you know we saw with the surgical
[Amit Varma]: strikes which you know luckily didn't lead to anything beyond that but where in fact you
[Amit Varma]: inadvertently played a part in a little number that came out of that narrative so do take an
[Amit Varma]: aside and tell us about that and then you can address a larger question yeah so the first the
[Guest]: aside so essentially it happened that the army that the army was briefing that they announced
[Guest]: these these these surgical strikes across the line of control and if i remember correctly now they
[Guest]: said five places had been hit which were these points from which terrorists were being sent
[Guest]: across and somebody a fellow journalist a television journalist for a hindi news channel
[Guest]: actually asked me yes sir you have served in that area what does it mean how many people would be
[Guest]: there in in such a place so i said you know five six seven people could be there these are very
[Guest]: small old disused bunkers kind of places from where you know militants and or terrorists are
[Guest]: sent across and these are the last stops in that in the in that sense so i said what five to seven
[Guest]: people a bunker can hold a small bunker can hold an old bunker that's what that's how it would be
[Guest]: and five of them have been hit so and a moment later i realized and there are those two or three
[Guest]: screens which play on the in that room in the army headquarters in the south block and i realized that
[Guest]: on one of these screens he's going live on mobile and he's telling that 30 to 35 people have been
[Guest]: killed because five bunkers have been because five places have been hit and each of them hold
[Guest]: seven people so there are 35 people and suddenly you have the headline 35 people it's actually i
[Guest]: just give a mathematical answer to a very you know kind of a how do i put it a very theoretical
[Guest]: question a very theoretical answer and it suddenly became inadvertently a kind of headline the 35
[Guest]: and suddenly every other journalist in that room television journalists in the room started getting
[Guest]: calls that you know this channel is running 35 dead why are we not running 35 dead and then they
[Guest]: started running uh i think the figures whatever those figures were which eventually led to whatever
[Guest]: the figures that they led to we still don't know how many actually died uh pakistan claimed two
[Guest]: but i don't know whether the whether the number was uh three i think pakistan came i don't know
[Guest]: whether the uh number was right or not now to the bigger question can the narrative push india and
[Guest]: pakistan down a dangerous path yes i think that danger remains especially uh because the emotion
[Guest]: has been whipped up to such an extent and where people genuinely believe that you know pakistan
[Guest]: is something which needs to be either destroyed or annihilated or completely finished that it would
[Guest]: be very difficult if something is proven or a narrative is created that something is happening
[Guest]: from pakistan for india to say that it would not punish pakistan so you know you did it after
[Guest]: pulwama you did it after uri and you know anything similar that happens you have raised the bar to an
[Guest]: extent where you would be forced to do something to send a message and as you said if there's a
[Guest]: scenario which is painted in which it is happening in a certain political context where there are
[Guest]: huge political costs to inaction or to not doing uh that kind of action the choice would be a very
[Guest]: tough one for the political leadership to make and it is likely that the decision would be would
[Guest]: err on the bolder side and not on the side of not uh not not doing this you know if they were
[Guest]: friendly relations if they were the kind of environment which you had in 2006 india probably
[Guest]: got away by not doing anything after 2008 militarily except going after it diplomatically
[Guest]: and putting so much of pressure on pakistan that it really squeezed pakistan very heavily
[Guest]: diplomatically but did not militarily punish pakistan now the military punishment to pakistan
[Guest]: these this is punitive strikes these are punitive in nature they are not essentially strikes which
[Guest]: are acting as a deterrence you know that they do not deter pakistanis from not doing it again
[Guest]: so you can punish them but it doesn't change their behavior you punish them with the surgical
[Guest]: strikes they still pulwama happens you do balakot but the militancy does not come down in kashmir
[Guest]: or the line of control does not become peaceful so a lot of people call it political theater
[Guest]: meant for domestic consumption because if you're not really altering the behavior of the adversary
[Guest]: then what is this about you know it's what is what is its strategic importance and i think
[Guest]: that's a question which remains unanswered and that's a question which a lot of people need to
[Guest]: ask as to what the value of these strikes is if they are not deterring pakistan or forcing it to
[Amit Varma]: alter its behavior i mean the value is obviously domestic consumption but then the point is that
[Amit Varma]: every time it's like a hit of a drug that even for domestic consumption you'll have to take it
[Amit Varma]: up one notch and while you don't actually change the adversary's behavior in a positive way you
[Amit Varma]: can affect it in a negative way if they then have to play to their political constituencies and
[Amit Varma]: respond in some way and i guess there's always a danger of that happening my next question is about
[Amit Varma]: before we get to indo china which is fascinating in itself and we'll take up some time but just to
[Amit Varma]: end with uh sort of the india pakistan with the question about recent events which is that in
[Amit Varma]: fact like i heard that president biden's administration made a little bit of a
[Amit Varma]: difference in the way india approaches all of this in fact an insider told me a couple of days ago i
[Amit Varma]: don't know how true this is maybe you'll have more information that one of the reasons that internet
[Amit Varma]: was restored in kashmir was that the biden administrate station made it a precondition for
[Amit Varma]: talking further to modi and equally they've kind of said that listen you really have to chill on
[Amit Varma]: all this anti-pakistan rhetoric and all of that which is why in these current elections you don't
[Amit Varma]: have so much anti-pakistan talk or almost any anti-pakistan talk coming from the bjp because
[Amit Varma]: they are kind of now uh chilling so how big a role is um sort of the u.s approach uh to this
[Guest]: whole situation yeah amit just coming before this question let me let me just rewind to the
[Guest]: statement you made at the back at the beginning of the question about the narrative and the
[Guest]: political calculations that can lead to pakistani response so what has happened so far in the two
[Guest]: instances the surgical strikes and the balakot strikes how the pakistanis have dealt with it is
[Guest]: they completely denied the surgical strikes they said nothing happened so they didn't need to
[Guest]: respond the narrative from their side was on the when it have came to balakot they said that the
[Guest]: balakot air strikes did not hit the target did not lead to any casualties so you know it was really
[Guest]: an effective strike and then they came back and did whatever little bit they did on the indian
[Guest]: side of the line of control so in that sense they also found a way to address their own political
[Guest]: constituency without really climbing up the escalation ladder now that's pretty lucky on
[Guest]: on the part of both countries it may or may not happen every single time and i think that's where
[Guest]: the fear that you raise really comes into play things can quickly go out of hand in such a
[Guest]: scenario you know just to give a counterfactual if the indian fighter pilot had died in pakistan
[Guest]: army custody after balakot the indian response would have been completely different and pakistan
[Guest]: would have no no kind of you know uh easy card on their in their pocket to hand over to india
[Guest]: the fact that pakistanis imran went to prime minister imran khan went to pakistani parliament
[Guest]: announced that they were handing over led to the defuse the crisis in a big way let's say if the
[Guest]: if the indian fighter pilot had been had died in pakistani custody for whatever reason whether he
[Guest]: was hit you know whether he was injured during the flight or whether he was beaten up by these
[Guest]: by the civilians villagers when he was captured or whether he was beaten by the pakistani military
[Guest]: when he was captured think of the whole situation how it would have developed pakistanis would have
[Guest]: had no way in which they would have defused the crisis the emotions and the tempers in india were
[Guest]: running so high that it would have been not it would not have been possible for anyone to advocate
[Guest]: that let's not go and do something more with pakistan so it is those kind of situations
[Guest]: accidentally otherwise which can really lead to a crisis completely going out of hand especially as
[Guest]: you said with two countries which are armed with nuclear weapons uh getting back to your other
[Guest]: question about the biden administration's role very clearly the kashmir internet thing whether
[Guest]: it is true or not the fact is that the state department did welcome it in a very enthusiastic
[Guest]: manner the date was done which was clearly a signal for a lot of things the fact that the
[Guest]: that the u.s defense secretary not general mattis but not general austin but secretary austin when
[Guest]: he came to india the fact that he chose to go public in the press conference and say that he
[Guest]: had spoken to india about the backsliding of democracy and various democratic freedoms
[Guest]: clearly indicates that it wanted to send a message to the indian side this democratic party the
[Guest]: current democratic party amit as you know has a lot of people who are far left on the progressive
[Guest]: side than historically the democratic party has been and this administration particularly
[Guest]: has been speaking tough on many issues with many other countries and if india has to stand
[Guest]: uh in contrast to china particularly on the issue of democracy and liberal values then i think there
[Guest]: would be pressure on india whether said or unsaid to deal with those issues it's not something india
[Guest]: can get away lightly with because of china uh it's something that would come into focus even
[Guest]: if it's not spoken publicly or spoken semi-publicly as secretary austin did it definitely plays and
[Guest]: will continue to play a part in the india u.s relations going forward let's talk about
[Amit Varma]: talk about china now because china suddenly kind of burst onto the consciousness in the
[Amit Varma]: sort of adversarial framework as it were in the last few years you know we lost the 62 war and
[Amit Varma]: that kind of happened and then for decades it's almost like there's been nothing there have been
[Amit Varma]: these little outstanding disputes but there's kind of been no action it's almost as if we are too
[Amit Varma]: small for china to bother with and when we start becoming big you could argue we start becoming
[Amit Varma]: big as a market as well where their manufacturers can sell stuff so you know why would they create a
[Amit Varma]: conflict or go for conflict and all of that and equally the situation is like you pointed out that
[Amit Varma]: if there was a hypothetical war in a thought experiment with china we would of course not
[Amit Varma]: stand a chance and they know that and we know that so beyond the point is really not much we can do
[Amit Varma]: that's my layman's understanding of it obviously there are nuances to it and you'll correct me
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about what's brewing here what are china's motivations what is a
[Amit Varma]: predicament that india finds itself in where for example we can't even admit that we've lost some
[Amit Varma]: territory for domestic political reasons obviously you know and in the middle of all this like all
[Amit Varma]: india could do was ban poetic talk which i loved which is like really sad but and which empowered
[Amit Varma]: many people in uh you know small town india and rural india who didn't have any other platform
[Amit Varma]: that spoke to them so it's just tragic at a at multiple levels i just feel horrible about that
[Guest]: but what's happening just enlighten us so essentially there is a line which goes directly
[Guest]: the chinese behavior changes around 2012 2013 with respect to india whether they believe that
[Guest]: they were coming on to their own whether they believe that india was getting too closely
[Guest]: aligned to the us whether they believe the time had come when the existing arrangements between
[Guest]: india and china which had held good for some 20 odd years had no longer held good the behavior
[Guest]: changes around that time and this is all the officials who dealt with china at that point in
[Guest]: time have now in hindsight said that this is the time when things start changing with changing with
[Guest]: china china's behavior becomes more assertive more aggressive it starts pushing more it has
[Guest]: better infrastructure better economy and everything else the major turning point comes in doklam in
[Guest]: 2017 this is the india bhutan tibet border china border in doklam as you know the chinese were
[Guest]: coming and making a road which we believed was in bhutanese territory the chinese believed it
[Guest]: was in their territory we came we went down from our post and on the indian side into what we
[Guest]: believed was bhutanese territory and what chinese believed was in their territory and stopped the
[Guest]: chinese physically from making that road the standoff lasted 73 days it was a tough standoff
[Guest]: but the message that china got was that indians were now aggressive enough to come down and stop
[Guest]: us on our soil think it from the chinese perspective and you know if you read some of
[Guest]: the chinese documentation around the time anant krishna has spoken written about about it in his
[Guest]: new book as well uh it's a great book by the way on india china relations this is when the shift
[Guest]: takes place in china's thinking and it starts looking at india that india is trying to be too
[Guest]: aggressive and trying to do something and a lot of chinese thinkers have have spoken about it
[Guest]: written about it it is around the same time that the india u.s ties start deepening the all these
[Guest]: agreements that india is signing the prime minister modi and president trump is the bonhomie between
[Guest]: them and the agreements that india and u.s are signing and there is an impression that the that
[Guest]: beijing uh gets at the time that india is only acting at the behest of the u.s which is completely
[Guest]: untrue which is which is completely untrue and then the whole uh nafraka around the revocation
[Guest]: of article 370 to which china objected and india flew in its foreign minister to go and brief them
[Guest]: or to breathe the chinese at a very very short notice and the chinese did not like it they kept
[Guest]: on issuing statement after statement whether it was in the u.n or whether it was either foreign
[Guest]: ministry there's a whole sequence of events and whole sequence of documents that are there which
[Guest]: show that the chinese were not happy the way jammu and kashmir was bifurcated and the article 370
[Guest]: was revoked they believe that india was trying to again assert its original claim on tibet on
[Guest]: aksai chain which which is which india historically had that's primarily my understanding of what the
[Guest]: chinese were objecting to not to what was happening to kashmiris but they are doing they are doing
[Guest]: far worse in in shenzhen so what they were primarily objecting was was india is trying to
[Guest]: reassert its line and this flows from how they had dealt in 2017 in in doklam and they were acting
[Guest]: at the behest of the us all this led to the situation which erupted in ladakh last year
[Guest]: where tensions had been brewing up for some time going back to at least october 2019 when
[Guest]: on the pangong so lake on the waters of the pangong so lake the indian and chinese forces
[Guest]: had clashed and certain indian soldiers were very badly injured who had to be heli lifted to the
[Guest]: nearest military hospital they were so badly injured it was a very serious clash and those
[Guest]: clashes led to situations where indian patrols were being stopped by the chinese indians are
[Guest]: also pushing back in certain areas and and trying to be aggressive for very obvious local reasons
[Guest]: you have to be aggressive against against an adversary you cannot allow an adversary to
[Guest]: ride roughshod or a ride offshore over you and one thing led to another till the time in early may
[Guest]: late april early may uh 2020 that is the chinese decided to replace their border guarding troops
[Guest]: with the regular pla and that is when the crisis really erupted what we read about on the 5th of
[Guest]: may they've clashed on pangong so lake we have so many people got injured on the indian side etc
[Guest]: etc and then as you saw one thing led to another the chinese coming in and occupying these areas
[Guest]: whether it was in whether it was in galwan whether it was in hot spring whether it was in gogra
[Guest]: whether it was in pangong and also all the all those actions took place whether they move forward
[Guest]: in depsang plains to stop indian patrols one of the some of the strategically the most important
[Guest]: area then they came down in demchok is much to the south close to the himachal ladakh border
[Guest]: they came down and dumped demchok two areas where they had not come down they crossed the nala
[Guest]: something called the cnn sharding darding nala i'm sorry for the i don't know the i don't remember
[Guest]: the full thing but it's called the cnn they crossed the cnn and and came down this side
[Guest]: so that is all that happened and eventually indians moved and occupied certain areas in
[Guest]: late august early september on the south of pangong lake in the kalash range the two the
[Guest]: the indian tanks and the chinese tanks were barely a few meters apart for all those months
[Guest]: there were rounds fired in the air some 100 200 300 routes fired uh we don't know whether physical
[Guest]: clashes took place but troops were face to face in that area tanks were face to face in that area
[Guest]: before the disengagement took place in some disengagement took place in january
[Guest]: and the whole buffer zone no patrol zone was created in that in that area in the whole situation
[Guest]: i missed out on the big major clash in galwan on 15th of june 20 indian soldiers lost their lives
[Guest]: and those were the first lives that were lost after 1975 on the sino-india border
[Guest]: there were all there were also 10 people who were released 10 indian soldiers including
[Guest]: four officers who were taken captive who were released after three days i read a report
[Guest]: somewhere which said that at least 50 indian soldiers are taken captive and others were
[Guest]: released much earlier and only 10 were released after after after three days and it's an indian
[Guest]: report it's an indian it's an indian uh website it's on india today in fact that the report was
[Guest]: there and uh that was a big crisis in the chinese data acknowledged that they had lost four of their
[Guest]: soldiers in that in that clash in in that in galwan and that really led to that two tempers
[Guest]: going through the roof on on both sides despite the prime minister saying four days after the
[Guest]: after the galwan clash that there's no chinese on indian territory
[Guest]: but the words to that the framing to that to that effect almost meaning that there's
[Guest]: nobody on indian no chinese on indian soil which was clearly not the case as the satellite imagery
[Guest]: all these commercial satellites uh commercial satellites showed us so the situation that we
[Guest]: have now coming back to the present is that there's been a complete disengagement on the
[Guest]: north bank and south bank of pangong so uh south bank of pangong so it where we had moved in later
[Guest]: and which allowed us to have an advantage and that has been bargaining for this creation of
[Guest]: this but no petrol buffer zone on the north bank the chinese continue to remain in the areas of
[Guest]: uh hot spring and gogra depsang and demcho in this i've spoken to enough military senior military
[Guest]: leaders who have commanded that uh commanded that area they all of them say that depsang is the most
[Guest]: worrisome and i'll take a couple of minutes to explain why depsang is most worrisome depsang is
[Guest]: very close to the karakoram pass just south of the karakoram pass is a flat area it's a flat area in
[Guest]: which the chinese have five roads which are coming to that area where they can use their armor and
[Guest]: and it forms a kind of a wedge towards this from to siachen so if the if chinese come from this
[Guest]: side you know from the east and move into depsang and indians only have one road through which they
[Guest]: can maintain depsang the new road which they constructed the chinese come and occupy depsang
[Guest]: plains and if they overcome one single mountain range which is there which is defended by indians
[Guest]: uh by by india then they could actually cut down the indian supply line to the southern siachen
[Guest]: glacier which would then allow the pakistanis to move in from their side and occupy the southern
[Guest]: glacier so that is what fundamentally the issue is this is the only place where china and pakistan
[Guest]: can physically meet territorially on the indian territory there is no other place where they can
[Guest]: physically meet it does not mean that china will go and occupy the siachen glacier it only means
[Guest]: that it facilitates the pakistani attack to to capture southern siachen glacier which is something
[Guest]: which india occupied in 84 and at a very high at a at a very high cost that is something which
[Guest]: really really worries the indians the most and depsang is not really defensible in that sense
[Guest]: because of the terrain configuration there and this is what most military commanders believe it
[Guest]: is not easily defendable and the chinese continue to block indians indian patrols in depsang even
[Guest]: now as we speak i saw a short interview by the army chief a few hours ago where he said that
[Guest]: the problem will be resolved eventually we are still talking about these places and i think that
[Guest]: remains the biggest worry as of now for the indian army and for the indian political leadership that
[Guest]: there are areas where disengagement has not taken place and depsang is one of the foremost areas
[Guest]: where that disengagement is not taking place i would in fact go and go out on a limb and say
[Guest]: that depsang is far more important than the pangong so lake strategically pangong lake may be
[Guest]: very good for tourist reasons for uh for reasons of civilian democratic uh electric leadership
[Guest]: going there civilians going there a lot of tourists going there but strategically is the area of
[Guest]: depsang which is far more important and which remains unresolved till now so tell me what are
[Amit Varma]: the implications of the growing closeness of china and pakistan like on one hand you could take the
[Amit Varma]: negative view that listen they're both antagonistic towards india and this is a classic example of how
[Amit Varma]: they can kind of come together and really squeeze us but on the other hand i did an episode with
[Amit Varma]: our friend pranay kutasane a couple of years back or maybe even three years ago where i asked him
[Amit Varma]: the same question and his point was it can also work the other way that it china has deep economic
[Amit Varma]: interests in pakistan and therefore they want pakistan to stay out of conflict and stay out of
[Amit Varma]: trouble and the economy to progress because it's obviously a positive sum game and all of that
[Amit Varma]: so it can also work the other way so how do you see this dynamic kind of playing out and also the
[Amit Varma]: interesting thing is that whereas as far as india is concerned uh you know china and pakistan are
[Amit Varma]: natural allies but from the u.s uh point of view you know they've kept pakistan close to themselves
[Amit Varma]: you know the relationship that deepened after the war on terror began so to say but at the same time
[Amit Varma]: they want india as a counterbalance to china in the subcontinent so what is the whole dynamic of
[Amit Varma]: this china pakistan relationship and how it could affect us i don't know amit if you're aware that
[Guest]: around a week or so back a note from the pakistani government was leaked by by a pakistani portal
[Guest]: and a social media handle which clearly showed that the chinese had during the ladakh crisis
[Guest]: last year had asked the pakistanis to mobilize to put pressure on india and the pakistanis refused
[Guest]: and that allowed them to build certain confidence with the indians so that they could go for the
[Guest]: kind of deal that they're going on that they've gone ahead on the line of control wow i didn't
[Guest]: know that that's fascinating yeah so the idea that uh that the uh that the chinese would not
[Guest]: want pakistan to be involved uh does not seem to hold good they would pakistan may not be a north
[Guest]: korea i agree with you to china um that's fine but even north korea doesn't listen to china always
[Guest]: so pakistan will not listen to china always pakistan has other friends whether it is saudis
[Guest]: whether it is ua may not be today but earlier or turkey or or u.s as you say u.s has certain
[Guest]: interests with in afghanistan for which it needs pakistan's help so pakistan uh has more friends
[Guest]: and may not listen to china always but clearly the strategic picture shows that the chinese
[Guest]: would want pakistan to come into play against india and use it but that also as you rightly
[Guest]: said gives india the option of dealing with pakistan so pakistan feels confident enough
[Guest]: to deal with india because it thinks that it has something up its sleeve that allows india to go
[Guest]: ahead and actually it's a kind of counterintuitive thing but it actually allows you to do a deal the
[Guest]: way it has happened now if pakistan wants as you said economic growth development whatever peace
[Guest]: in in any sense of what in whatever limited way it would then say see guys i did not go along with
[Guest]: china i didn't fight so why don't we do a deal and that's something which what which we are almost
[Guest]: seeing happen this way so this may in a sense have come to india's advantage in a way that india can
[Guest]: do a deal with pakistan but as we discussed earlier the whole political narrative in india
[Guest]: and the structural factors how do we do a deal with pakistan because essentially if you do a
[Guest]: deal with pakistan if you can find peace with pakistan the two front threat actually goes away
[Guest]: because the chinese threat is not going away you know let's be clear everybody knows globally
[Guest]: as you saw the new york times piece today the chinese are very clearly positioning themselves
[Guest]: as ideologically opposed to the us-led grouping saying clearly we stand here this is what we are
[Guest]: we are not taking it lying down and you know we are going to push bring countries on our side and
[Guest]: we are going to say that this is what it is and the and as a country which shares a land border
[Guest]: with china disputed land border with china india cannot afford to you know walk away from the
[Guest]: chinese shadow the chinese threat is going to remain and is going to increase by the day
[Guest]: india as the as a major country in asia will have to leave with it pakistan need not necessarily be
[Guest]: a threat or an adversary to you if you can do a deal with pakistan that's my sense but of course
[Guest]: there are many ifs and buts in it the least of all being the the indian political scenario but
[Guest]: there are other things within pakistan itself there are huge fault lines there are huge problems
[Guest]: within pakistan the whole narrative of pakistan as to why it exists why the country exists would
[Guest]: be under threat if there's a peace with india the whole idea of kashmir what happens to kashmir
[Guest]: is it integral to pakistan's existence all those questions come into play so i am not really uh i'm
[Guest]: not sanguine but i believe that the answer actually lies in india doing a deal with pakistan
[Guest]: to resolve one front and then try and find ways to deal with the chinese threat or try and do a
[Guest]: deal with china to resolve the crisis i think it would be a bad for the indian economy it would
[Guest]: be bad for the indian milit indian military and it would be very bad for the indian strategic
[Guest]: calculus if the two-front threat is not removed because as we have seen from this current ladakh
[Guest]: crisis or rather the ladakh crisis which just disengagement has just taken place it is a real
[Guest]: threat and it can and it can lead to situations where where india can be put under pressure which
[Guest]: would lead to more spending on the military which would put it which would further impinge on our
[Guest]: economic growth and make us economically unattractive in some ways and you know like
[Amit Varma]: any conflict is a negative some game um you know the india china conflict also seems that way but
[Amit Varma]: it feels worse for india like you have pointed out you wrote in a recent piece in foreign policy that
[Amit Varma]: you know this it might seem to be a stalemate but it's actually a stalemate that china is better
[Amit Varma]: equipped to handle for a couple of reasons number one they have far deeper pockets like you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out elsewhere that their defense budget is nearly four times as much as india their economy
[Amit Varma]: is nearly six times uh bigger and that's gap has actually widened during the pandemic because
[Amit Varma]: somehow they've even though it started there they've kind of handled it better than we managed
[Amit Varma]: so that's one thing and the other thing is that all of this distracts our security forces from
[Amit Varma]: the other front so to say that the opportunity cost for india of manning that china border and
[Amit Varma]: being alert and all of that is far greater than it is for china because hey they've got such a
[Amit Varma]: massive and modern uh force uh so what what are your kind of thoughts on that because it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that you know we come off worse no matter what we do and uh to some extent our basket of
[Amit Varma]: options there is in thinking of how best we can limit our losses until some point maybe through
[Amit Varma]: diplomacy maybe through trade we can just you know get past this what's your sense of the
[Amit Varma]: indian thinking on this and what are the realistic options in front of us like if you were in the
[Amit Varma]: foreign ministry now what would you be telling the chinese what would you be trying to do
[Guest]: so you know the the argument that i made that i make is that even the the political imperative
[Guest]: is that india cannot afford to lose any territory to china and if that is the political imperative
[Guest]: even if this crisis gets resolved in some way india would have to deploy its forces closer to
[Guest]: the border ground forces closer to the border to prevent any loss of territory now with the
[Guest]: budgets limited and with the finances as they are as we have discussed again and again uh this would
[Guest]: mean that india cannot really build its navy which needs to go out in the indian ocean region and do
[Guest]: what it needs to do along with other quad partners which is which is what would make india more
[Guest]: attractive to the to its quad partners if it can go out in the in the indian ocean region and can
[Guest]: do what it needs to do in the seas or can take on a very fast growing chinese navy pla navy in the
[Guest]: region that is the opportunity cost essentially which comes from there now why does that cost
[Guest]: come that cost comes because of the political imperative of not losing any territory now
[Guest]: militaries do not think that way militaries are fine with losing territory because they can either
[Guest]: go back and capture that same piece of territory again so by using military force and if they
[Guest]: can't they can go and capture another valuable piece of adversary's territory so that they can
[Guest]: negotiate on the table and exchange those two pieces of land so losing territory is no big deal
[Guest]: militarily but politically in india especially with a more powerful country like china it is a
[Guest]: very big deal and that is what forces india's hand if india could do what is called a qpq or
[Guest]: could proco you know you come and capture something in galwan i'll go and capture something in armachal
[Guest]: or tibet or wherever or himachal wherever else i'll go i'll go and capture some territory so
[Guest]: you jolly well then you know you will we will both go into the negotiating table and and that
[Guest]: will be vacated that's something which was advocated in non-alignment 2.0 which was produced
[Guest]: in 2013 by the current institution where i am at the center for policy research so that is
[Guest]: essentially where the whole problem lies the fact that india is unwilling to do a qpq on china and
[Guest]: the political imperative is that you cannot lose any territory so if we had a way by which we could
[Guest]: regain lost territory we would not need to deploy as we are planning to deploy or as we are trying
[Guest]: to deploy to minimize any loss of territory and i think that is a more exhausting option of trying
[Guest]: to deploy in that manner so amit i hope you realize that the chinese do not deploy all across
[Guest]: the border like we deploy they actually come from 200-250 kilometers far behind and then move in
[Guest]: because they are very confident about probably as you said the power differential that they have
[Guest]: uh the last major deployment they did was in doklam close to the place where indians stopped
[Guest]: them they've created a big military base as satellite images etc have shown since so that is
[Guest]: where i think probably an answer could lie if the military was confident enough and had the political
[Guest]: mandate to go and do a quick proko there are areas where they can certainly go and occupy a certain
[Guest]: giant piece of chinese territory chinese cannot defend every single piece of land you know they
[Guest]: are not 60 feet tall dragon in that sense no so uh we need to recognize that but that would mean
[Guest]: taking a certain political risk in terms of losing certain territory initially that would provide the
[Guest]: ideal solution a rational solution to this kind of a problem where we get bogged down trying to
[Guest]: defend every inch of our territory i think also that comes from the whole historical narrative
[Guest]: that not even one inch of territory will be lost to the and lost to the adversary i think that
[Guest]: political line which is so filmy in its nature has completely made it very difficult for our
[Guest]: political leaders to to go we are sensitive about territory because of historical reasons we are a
[Guest]: land dominated country the land is scarce we are you know highly populated population density is
[Guest]: very high india was not united before you know earlier so you don't want to lose any piece of
[Guest]: territory because you are worried if you start losing territory there would be other areas where
[Guest]: you would where you would lose territory and would do nothing about it you know the whole
[Guest]: fraca over the bangladesh those exchange of villages went on for so many years and supreme
[Guest]: court and everybody got into play because you just don't want to lose any territory whatsoever
[Guest]: for any reason which i think india is now india should be politically confident after so many
[Guest]: years after independence this is not the india of the 1950s where it needs to really defend every
[Guest]: inch of territory or claim that it is defending every inch of territory it needs to be far more
[Guest]: confident and think in more strategic terms more military terms while dealing with the territory
[Amit Varma]: and what is your thinking and the thinking of experts in the field about what china wants
[Amit Varma]: because it seems to me that in all of this like let's say okay doklam was sort of you know like
[Amit Varma]: a provocation for them but at this moment in time listen i'm sure they don't want a few little
[Amit Varma]: piddly bits of territory on the border what difference does it make to them what do they
[Amit Varma]: really want at what point if we can credibly communicate that listen we'll work with you
[Amit Varma]: we won't necessarily be usa's counterbalance in asia let's work together let's trade together you
[Amit Varma]: know our entire country is a market for your goods and all of that then is there a way of
[Amit Varma]: getting to that kind of table and just changing the tone and you know sorting this military issue
[Amit Varma]: through politics through diplomacy through whatever yeah perhaps there is but as our
[Guest]: foreign minister mr jay shankar said that he himself doesn't know the reason why the chinese
[Guest]: have done it so you know if india's foreign yeah he's on record if indian foreign minister does not
[Guest]: know why the chinese have done this it's hard for amit you or me or any other analyst to actually
[Guest]: assess why the job because i'm sure the chinese would have told him in their various meetings
[Guest]: or his diplomats in various meetings why they have done what they did in ladakh clearly as you said
[Guest]: it seems to be something about the counterbalancing that the indians are doing along with the along
[Guest]: with the us and is there a way in which india can assure the chinese without being subservient to
[Guest]: them without conceding its own interest i think that still remains to be seen china is really
[Guest]: coming out in some way and it's been very very assertive in so many ways i don't know if there
[Guest]: is a way in which india can operate with with china without conceding on its sovereign interest
[Guest]: i would be watching very carefully in the coming months when president she is supposed to come to
[Guest]: india for the brick summit etc as to what happens or if president she and prime minister modi
[Guest]: actually undertake another informal undertake another informal summit and arrive at some other
[Guest]: formulation some other solutions and what kind of give and take takes place whether india wants to
[Guest]: concede something on the bri or something else takes place i would be very carefully watching
[Guest]: the the rest of the year for science on india china i don't think we should not assume that
[Guest]: everything is lost on india china and there is no way that nothing can be regained despite the push
[Guest]: by the biden administration and the court because at the end of the day there are parts of biden
[Guest]: administration which are engaging with china john kerry is holding a meeting on on environment and
[Guest]: climate with his chinese counterpart so there is a there remains a very distinct possibility
[Guest]: than the indian and chinese government may find a way to engage and find and do some give and take
[Guest]: some exchange through which they find certain answers to their current predicament and create
[Guest]: structures where these tensions do not arise the old structures which are created uh in narsimha
[Guest]: rao's time probably have outlived their utility and new structures for uh for peace building uh
[Guest]: for for resolving tensions for could be could have to be formulated uh under a new framework
[Amit Varma]: by the two governments these are really hopeful words you know may there be clarified butter and
[Amit Varma]: sugar in your mouth basically and sort of and you know you've outlined in the course of this india
[Amit Varma]: the the security the challenge to india's national security pretty well there's pakistan there's
[Amit Varma]: china there's a pressure of a two-front war there is our fading economy you know part of which also
[Amit Varma]: feeds into the whole problem of our armed forces not being modernized enough and not being enough
[Amit Varma]: revenue for that all of these are sort of valid points would you add something to that and then
[Amit Varma]: to go further what would you say if you look over say the next 10 years what would you say is a best
[Amit Varma]: case scenario and worst case scenario in terms of india's national security like what could go wrong
[Amit Varma]: or and how could we actually uh you know make progress on all these fronts so remember you
[Guest]: know there are four things which are which are the national security imperatives for india the unity
[Guest]: unity of india's india's unity you know territorial integrity essentially what i'm talking to
[Guest]: sovereignty you know whether it was non-alignment whether it is strategic sovereignty whatever word
[Guest]: we may want to use can india take sovereign decisions as a sovereign as a sovereign power
[Guest]: that is the second national security imperative the third national security imperative is internal
[Guest]: security internal security so that there's a rule of law and there is development growth peace
[Guest]: business etc etc within the country and the fourth thing is a global standing can india really you
[Guest]: know reach that kind of global standing so within those four parameters through which the indian
[Guest]: national security paradigm has to be judged what could go wrong what could go right you know what
[Guest]: could obviously go wrong is you could face a resurgent crisis in kashmir in the north and in
[Guest]: the northeast the two areas where situation has not really stabilized especially if things go wrong
[Guest]: in bangladesh with sheikh hasina because clearly till the time sheikh hasina is there she's very
[Guest]: close to the indian government and things are fine but if she goes away i do not know what kind of
[Guest]: situation would emerge in bangladesh and what impact it would have in northeast particularly
[Guest]: with whatever is going on in myanmar in myanmar right now so it the situation in india's neighborhood
[Guest]: essentially could lead to crisis in northeast could lead to a crisis in in in kashmir with
[Guest]: either pakistan and of course on top of that that you could have a pakistan china threat
[Guest]: collusively coming into play and china trying to bring all the neighborhood countries whether it
[Guest]: is nepal whether it is sri lanka maldives into its orbit of influence and trying to put india
[Guest]: under pressure that would be the worst case scenario that everything going wrong we'll be
[Guest]: talking about virtually everything has gone wrong your kashmir has gone wrong northeast has gone
[Guest]: wrong nepal sri lanka bangladesh myanmar china pakistan everything has gone wrong that's the
[Guest]: worst case scenario that's possible a probability can vary you know nepal may not go wrong sri
[Guest]: lanka may not go wrong bangladesh may not go wrong but probability is low but everything can go wrong
[Guest]: that's thing what can go right india resolves kashmir through political means not through
[Guest]: military means india resolves the problems in nagaland our problems in the northeast whether
[Guest]: it is nagaland manipur etc and finds a way out india finds a way to engage with bangladesh
[Guest]: in a manner that once the sheikh haseen administration is not there it does not
[Guest]: lose its credibility and this say inside bangladesh india is able to find a way to
[Guest]: deal with china as you said where they can both cooperate and compete at the same time without
[Guest]: getting into adversarial positions or having this enmity of such a high standard with their
[Guest]: militarily confronting each other or challenging or challenging each other and india can at the
[Guest]: same time have a deal with pakistan where it's no longer a threat and in such a scenario india
[Guest]: would rather devote more of its political energies and economic resources towards development growth
[Guest]: poverty alleviation then towards its military and devoting this whole narrative national narrative
[Guest]: around who our enemy is and how we need to tackle that enemy we would rather be talking about how to
[Guest]: lift these 7.5 crore people who have been pushed into poverty during the pandemic and all the other
[Guest]: challenges of inequality of illiteracy of joblessness that really india needs to tackle
[Guest]: india really doesn't india should not be for india at this point in time pakistan or china
[Guest]: should not be the real problem the real problem is what our own country you know citizens of the
[Guest]: country are faced i think that's what the best case scenario for india would be here yeah and i
[Amit Varma]: think in a sense our your advice for india would also be the same as your advice for any individual
[Amit Varma]: that if you sort out the problems within then you can sort out kind of the problems without
[Amit Varma]: so before ending this episode i just want to kind of get back to the personal because you
[Amit Varma]: made this interesting journey where you're a young boy growing up in agra then you've joined the army
[Amit Varma]: you've spent some time in the army you've moved on to the uh you know you've become a journalist
[Amit Varma]: and now uh sort of a think tanky as it were uh working for cpr so you know so how do you look
[Amit Varma]: at this current path that you're on in a sense it's kind of accidental because obviously if you
[Amit Varma]: don't join the army you don't end up here either uh so what what do you feel about your current
[Amit Varma]: path what are the things that make you look forward to the day when you wake up in the morning
[Amit Varma]: is it writing is it reading is it uh just talking to smart people you know what drives you so the
[Guest]: current path is good uh you know i have taught it at at yale i taught in the political science
[Guest]: department at yale in 2019 fall 2019 they have again invited me to go and teach there that's
[Guest]: something i look forward to again going and teaching there it's a wonderful university
[Guest]: wonderful environment lovely place to be there other than that the fact that i am able to think
[Guest]: read and write without being cpr is a great place to work by the way uh my boss yamini here she's a
[Guest]: wonderful person and they give a lot of freedom for people to do what they want to exercise without
[Guest]: putting them under pressure it's a kind of place which allows you to intellectually engage and do
[Guest]: things that you wish to do without really looking over your shoulder which is a great opportunity
[Guest]: at this stage of my life other than that what do i think when i wake up when i wake up i actually
[Guest]: look forward to yes reading writing and meeting interesting people all three things actually
[Guest]: reading more reading and meeting interesting people uh but and writing less uh writing is
[Guest]: less of a hassle because now i do find serious writing being able to produce new ideas more
[Guest]: regularly a huge challenge i i admire people who are able to write a very high quality stuff uh
[Guest]: very regularly it's not that something that that comes naturally or or easily to me but yes reading
[Amit Varma]: and meeting interesting people definitely drives me every day yeah and as this show and this episode
[Amit Varma]: is a witness to i get to meet interesting people as well so sushant thanks a lot for being a guest
[Amit Varma]: today on the scene and the unseen i really appreciate your time and insights thank you
[Guest]: so much amit it was a pleasure it's been a long show thank you thanks a lot
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over to the show notes for many many links
[Amit Varma]: enter rabbit holes my friends if you want to follow sushant on twitter you can do that at
[Amit Varma]: sushant sin that is s-i-n so s-u-s-h-a-n-t s-i-n and you can follow me at amit verma a-m-i-t-v-a-r-m-a
[Amit Varma]: you can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen dot i n thank you for
[Amit Varma]: listening did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support the
[Amit Varma]: production of the show you can go over to seen unseen dot i n slash support and contribute any
[Amit Varma]: amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking thank you you